university of central lancashire coara action plan introduction research is a key pillar of the university of central lancashire’s strategic plan 2021-2028. priority 4: real world research and innovation describes how we will “establish ourselves as a leader in research, innovation and enterprise within the modern university sector”. this is directly supported by priority 3: our people experience, which seeks to “continue to attract and retain the very best talent and enable everyone to do their best work”. this will be done through nurturing an environment of high performance and high support, where leaders provide direction and guidance, and colleagues are engaged and empowered to deliver their best work. central to this, we are committed to building a culture of belonging through equality, diversity and inclusion. the university has held the hr excellence in research award since 2011 and we are a signatory to the concordat to support the development of researchers and technician commitment. we have developed our support for and commitment to responsible research assessment (rra) practices since 2019. in collaboration with our staff, we drafted our institutional statement on the responsible use of research metrics and became a signatory to the san francisco declaration on research assessment. we became a signatory to the coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) in march 2023. as a signatory to the agreement on reforming research assessment that underpins the coalition, the university commits to sharing how we have started the process of reviewing and developing criteria, tools and processes in line with the core commitments through establishment of an action plan with defined milestones, within one year of signing the agreement. rra is overseen by the university’s research and knowledge exchange edi group (established june 2022), with onwards reporting to the university research, knowledge exchange and ethics committee. whilst we have started our journey to reform research assessment, much work remains to be done. our commitment to coara is a key step in further embedding rra across the university. in producing this action plan, we have reviewed the various approaches taken by other universities. our action plan adopts the format taken by loughborough university 1. version 1.3 march 2024 1 loughborough university coara action plan. elizabeth gadd, 2023. https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/online_resource/loughborough_university_coara_action_ plan/24260686 1 university of central lancashire coara action plan v1.3 commitment scope action timeframe 1. recognise the diversity of contributions to, changes in assessment practices should enable recognition of the broad 1.1 develop a new responsible research december 2024 and careers in, research in accordance with diversity of: assessment policy that makes explicit the the needs and nature of the research. • valuable contributions that researchers make to science and for the requirements of the agreement on purpose: this commitment will broaden recognition benefit of society, including diverse outputs beyond journal reforming research assessment. of the diverse practices, activities and careers in publications and irrespective of the language in which they are 1.2 review the institutional use of responsible research, considering the specific nature of research communicated; july 2024 research metrics statement. disciplines and other research endeavours. • practices that contribute to robustness, openness, transparency, and 1.3 review and update open research the inclusiveness of research and the research process including: peer september 2024 policies to require that fair attribution is review, teamwork and collaboration; given to all technical and other support, for • activities including teaching, leadership, supervision, training and example, using the credit system. mentoring. it is also important that assessment facilitates the recognition and valorisation of diverse roles and careers in research, including: data steward, software engineer and data scientist roles, technical roles, public outreach, science diplomacy, science advice and science communicator roles to name a few. it is recognised that current practice is often too narrow and limiting, so the goal cannot be to replace the narrow criteria we wish to move away from with different but equally narrow criteria. instead, the aim is to allow organisations to broaden the spectrum of what they value in research, while acknowledging that this may vary across disciplines and that each individual researcher should not be expected to contribute to all activities at once. 2. base research assessment primarily on research assessment should rely primarily on qualitative assessment for 2.1. develop cris (or other system) capacity to december 2025 qualitative evaluation for which peer review which peer review is central, supported by responsibly used quantitative collect and profile diverse types of is central, supported by responsible use of indicators where appropriate. peer review is the most robust method known information on academic contribution to quantitative indicators. for assessing quality and has the advantage that it is in the hands of the research and knowledge exchange, purpose: this commitment will enable the move research community. it is important that peer review processes are designed including peer review activities. towards research assessment criteria that focus to meet the fundamental principles of rigor and transparency: expert 2.2. develop training for researchers and primarily on quality, while recognising that assessment, transparency, impartiality, appropriateness, confidentiality, july 2024 research managers on the resumé for responsible use of quantitative indicators can integrity and ethical considerations, gender, equality and diversity. to researchers (or equivalent) to support support assessment where meaningful and relevant, address the biases and imperfections to which any method is prone, the broader assessment approaches. which is context dependent. research community re-assesses and improves peer review practices regularly. revised, or potentially new, criteria, tools and processes 2.3. review appraisal guidance to ensure that appropriate for assessing quality could be explored alongside peer review. researchers are recognised for september 2024 moving towards assessment practices that rely more heavily on qualitative contribution to peer review internally and methods may require additional efforts from researchers. researchers should externally. be recognised for these efforts and their contributions to reviewing peers’ 2.4. develop discipline-specific training around work should be valued as part of their career progression. december 2024 peer review and quality assessment. 2.5. provide guidance on open peer review and december 2024 peer review credit systems. 2.6. ongoing peer review of outputs to underpin ref2029 preparations, with clear advice on appropriate use of metrics. 2 university of central lancashire coara action plan v1.3 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based metrics in research 3.1. review the institutional use of responsible july 2024 assessment of journal- and publication-based assessment should be abandoned. in particular, this means moving away research metrics statement. metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of from using metrics like the journal impact factor (jif), article influence score 3.2. annual refresh and review of web journal impact factor (jif) and h-index (ais) and h-index as proxies for quality and impact. ‘inappropriate uses’ resources and training material to improve july 2024 purpose: this commitment will reduce the include: engagement levels, including compelling dominance of a narrow set of quantitative journal- examples of bad practice. and publication-based metrics. • relying exclusively on author-based metrics (e.g. counting papers, 3.3. monitor staff awareness of open research patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; december 2024 and responsible research assessment • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, developments via biennial researcher format or language; survey. • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact. 4. avoid the use of rankings of research recognising that the international rankings most often referred to by research 4.1. join more than our rank initiative. september 2024 organisations in research assessment organisations are currently not ‘fair and responsible’, the criteria these 4.2. raise awareness on the limitations of september 2024 purpose: this commitment will help avoid that rankings use should not trickle down to the evaluation of individual rankings and ensure that all materials that and ongoing metrics used by international rankings, which are researchers, research teams and research units. research organisations refer to league tables or rankings clearly commitment inappropriate for assessing researchers, trickle should also be mindful that public communication (e.g. the active advertising acknowledge their limitations. down to research and researcher assessment. it will of an institution’s rank) can contribute to the perception that research quality help the research community and research conflates with ranking positions. organisations regain the autonomy to shape assessment practices, rather than having to abide by where ranking approaches are deemed unavoidable, as may be the case in criteria and methodologies set by external forms of evaluation beyond the scope of this agreement such as commercial companies. this could include retaining benchmarking and performance reviews of countries or institutions, the control over ranking methodologies and data. methodological limitations of such approaches should be acknowledged, and institutions should avoid trickle-down effects on research and researcher assessment. 5. commit resources to reforming research resource allocation by assessment authorities and research funding and 5.1. research and ke edi group to review july 2024 and assessment as is needed to achieve the performing organisations is a necessary condition for reforming assessment relevant policies and guidance annually. ongoing organisational changes committed to practices. resources should be allocated as is needed for each organisation 5.2. responsible research assessment to be april 2024 and purpose: this commitment will ensure that to achieve the changes that will enable adherence to the principles and to included as a standing item on research ongoing organisations allocate the necessary resources, implement the commitments. this includes resources to: and ke edi group meetings. whether in the form of budget or staff capacity, to • implement changes in research assessment, including planning and improve research assessment practices within their progress monitoring; 5.3. open and responsible research practices june 2024 agreed timeframe. are included in researcher training and • raise awareness among all actors; development programmes, ensuring • educate, train and support researchers and any other staff involved in coverage across career levels. assessment, including peer-reviewers and assessors; and 5.4. support for responsible research december 2024 • support the necessary infrastructure such as tools and services for the assessment to be included in relevant transparent collection and processing of data on research assessment professional services and academic job practices. descriptions. • particular attention should be paid to making resources available to 5.5. participate in ref2029 consultations 2023-2026 enable the engagement of researchers at all career stages in around reforming research assessment, reforming research assessment. including pilot exercises. 3 university of central lancashire coara action plan v1.3 6. review and develop research assessment 6.1 review current research assessment december 2024 criteria, tools and processes criteria and their implementation, ensuring 6.1 criteria for units and institutions that these are robust and comply with responsible research assessment with the direct involvement of research criteria for the assessment of research performing units and organisations, principles. organisations and researchers at all career stages, including universities, research centres, and research infrastructures, should review and develop criteria for assessing research be reviewed and adapted, and new criteria developed where needed, based 6.2 develop institute and school dashboards units and research performing organisations, while in collaboration with leaders that capture a december 2025 on evidence. this should be done in close collaboration with assessors and promoting interoperability those that will be assessed, including research organisations and researchers. range of contributions to research and purpose: this commitment will ensure that national the changes should increase the ability to assess quality by enabling knowledge exchange. / regional / organisational authorities and evaluation recognition of all contributions to quality research by research units and 6.3 develop cris capacity/reporting agencies review and, where needed, develop institutions. such recognition includes that of early sharing of data and results, functionality that allows consistent and june 2025 criteria for the assessment of research performing open collaboration, teamwork; and consideration of contributions to the accurate monitoring of a range of units and organisations, in accordance with the research ecosystem, knowledge generation and scientific, technological, qualitative and quantitative information, principles. it will foster the responsible use of economic, cultural and societal impact. national / regional / organisational where staff can easily view, amend or metrics in assessing research performing units and authorities and evaluation agencies should coordinate to ensure their challenge information relating to them. organisations, and help to prevent contradictions or methodologies and processes are interoperable, while simultaneously incompatibilities between the assessment of respecting the necessary adaptation to each context. 6.4 in collaboration with staff, develop a code research, researchers and research performing of practice for ref2029 that embeds the organisations. it will also safeguard the principles of responsible research 2025 to 2026 interoperability of adapted or newly developed assessment. assessment processes. 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers criteria, tools and processes should be reviewed and developed together with researchers in different disciplines and at different career stages; and with the direct involvement of researchers at all should enable recognition of the diversity of research activities and practices career stages, review and develop criteria, tools and that contribute to research quality, including diverse outputs in different processes for the assessment of research projects, languages. this should increase the ability to assess quality by enabling research teams and researchers that are adapted to recognition of all contributions to quality research from research projects and their context of application by researchers and research teams. this includes recognition of early sharing purpose: this commitment will enable recognition of data and results, open collaboration, and teamwork. reformed practices of the diverse research activities and practices for assessing individual researchers should consider future potential through the revision and development of alongside track record and take into account researchers’ individual contexts assessment criteria, tools, and processes. it will and careers. they should also recognise that researchers cannot excel in all ensure that organisations review their processes and types of tasks and provide for a framework that allows researchers to make tangible changes by developing existing or contribute to the definition of their research goals and aspirations. research new assessment approaches, individually or in assessment by research funders should consider disciplinary, multi-, inter-, collaboration with others, in accordance with the and trans-disciplinary research as well as contributions to knowledge principles. generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact. 7. raise awareness of research assessment without widespread awareness of the reform and training of those assessed 7.1 include information on open and march 2024 reform and provide transparent and, crucially, assessors, progress will be slow – if not impossible. responsible research practices in communication, guidance, and training on organisations should be clear and transparent about assessment processes researcher development and training assessment criteria and processes as well as and the tools and criteria they use. they should make guidance on their programmes. their use assessment approaches openly available and train those involved in the 7.2 review and refresh web resources and purpose: this commitment will ensure that assessment process. they should allow those assessed to have access to the july 2024 training materials at least annually to organisations raise awareness of the reform among criteria, data and reviews or deliberation outcomes used in their assessment ensure external and internal sector all actors. it will ensure that organisations within the limits of confidentiality. particular attention should be paid to developments are captured and that transparently communicate the criteria, tools and raising awareness among researchers at all career stages. content is easy to find, relevant and processes used for research assessment and train engaging. researchers and assessors in their use. 4 university of central lancashire coara action plan v1.3 8. exchange practices and experiences to while respecting each other’s autonomy, organisations should share 8.1 head of impact and outputs unit/open ongoing enable mutual learning within and beyond practices and experiences to facilitate mutual learning. this exchange should research manager to participate in coara commitment the coalition include contributing to the development of guidance and common meetings/events. purpose: this commitment will ensure approaches in order to minimise contradictions or incompatibilities between 8.2 head of impact and outputs unit/open ongoing organisations exchange and make use of the assessment practices used by different organisations. it should also research manager to participate in the uk commitment information for mutual learning. it will help avoid include sharing of lessons learned to ensure continuous mutual chapter and one other coara working fragmentation, contribute to the coherence of improvements. group. assessment practices between organisations, and enable researcher mobility. it also will allow those 8.3 senior academic and professional services december 2024 further ahead to share approaches and lessons representatives to participate in learned, to benefit those who have further to go on requirements of the ukrn’s or4 project their reform journey. on open and responsible researcher reward and recognition, including completion of the pilot maturity self- assessment. 9. communicate progress made on adherence demonstrating progress made towards implementing the commitments and 9.1 publish our coara action plan on uclan april 2024 to the principles and implementation of the adherence to the principles is an important part of this initiative. web pages once approved. commitments organisations should commit to regularly update each other and their 9.2 responsible research assessment is a april 2024 and purpose: this commitment will ensure communities on their adherence and progress. this process involves being standing item on research and knowledge ongoing organisations update one another on the progress open to scrutiny from their own communities, sharing successes as well as exchange edi group meetings. made. it will foster careful self-reflection and challenges, and communicating their experiences to facilitate collective monitoring of their own adherence to the principles progress. and progress towards meeting the commitments. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based growing evidence shows that current assessment processes that rely on 10.1 head of impact and outputs unit to keep ongoing on solid evidence and the state-of-the-art in publication- and journal-based metrics are prone to multiple biases. as abreast of developments in best practice in commitment research on research, and make data openly approaches using more qualitative research assessment are piloted by rra, through participation in arma, or4 available for evidence gathering and several organisations (e.g. narrative and evidence-based cvs, new and coara events, and other relevant research assessment frameworks and indicators), it is important to evaluate and activities. purpose: this commitment will ensure that monitor their impact based on evidence and rigorous methods. assessment approach decisions are evidence organisations should contribute to the evidence base on research informed. it will help organisations reflect on their assessment in order to make this possible. for example, it could be achieved own processes, gain understanding about whether by making data that can be used for research on research available, by assessment practices achieve the desired goals, and participating in research on research, or by funding research on research. engage in evolutive assessment based on new data sharing should be the minimum commitment and data should be shared evidence as it becomes available. it will also help to through open infrastructure, while respecting personal data protection. ensure control and ownership of research assessment data by the research community. 5
