date 30 may 2024 version 1 authors jennifer de wolf-collins annelein stax lotte van der heijden (department) coara action plan, 2024-2027 © 2024, erasmus mc 1/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 1. introduction erasmus mc endorsed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) and joined the coalition of advancing research assessment (coara) in october 2022. joining coara signifies erasmus mc’s dedication to evaluate and enhance the criteria, instruments, and processes involved in research assessment. in the netherlands, the recognition & rewards (r&r) movement, which started in 2019, has broadened the acknowledgement and appreciation of the work of academics. this, for instance, entails diminishing the emphasis on publication metrics, while increasing focus on their involvement in various other domains, such as education, impact, leadership, and patient care. the r&r movement also advocates for the diversification and vitalization of career paths, acknowledges team performances, emphasizes the quality of work over quantitative results, stimulates open science, and encourages high-quality leadership. over the past couple of years, erasmus mc has been working on refining and reforming its research assessment criteria. the image below provides a brief overview of initiatives within the erasmus mc that are dedicated to the assessment of research(ers), both on the organizational and individual level. the details of these initiatives will be explained more in-depth in the second section below. the efforts of the erasmus mc to refine its research assessment criteria are also interwoven with the principle of open science, which is key in fostering a culture of transparency. open science not only offers opportunities to collaborate with, contribute to, and benefit from the academic process, but it also lets academics share their (research) results more broadly with other academics, peers, and society. this action plan is a living document which will be updated regularly. in this document we outline what the erasmus mc is currently doing regarding the coara commitments, along with its plans, goals, and objectives for 2024-2027. © 2024, erasmus mc page 2/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 initiatives within the erasmus mc that are dedicated to the assessment and development of research(ers), both on the organizational and individual level: © 2024, erasmus mc page 3/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 2. the coara commitments, erasmus mc’s current status, and plans for 2024-2027 coara commitments: current status (may, 2024): plans for 2024-2027: 1. recognize the diversity of contributions recognition of departments: recognition of departments: to, and careers in, research in accordance • a new model for the allocation of the direct government funding • all departments are required to undergo the process of writing with the needs and nature of the research (first income stream) has been implemented (portfolio model). in new narratives for the portfolio model again in the next two this new model, all erasmus mc departments write a narrative in years, after which they will repeat the process every three which they (1) describe how the research strategy of their years. furthermore, the portfolio model will be evaluated in department aligns with the erasmus mc research strategy, (2) q2/q3 of 2024. describe what their sustainable and impactful collaborations are, (3) describe how they implement open science practices, and (4) recognition of individuals and talent support: write a strategic talent management plan. this new model • promotion guidelines for academic staff with an education makes a break away from the previous model based on profile will be revised. started in q4 2023, expected in q3 of quantitative (perverse) parameters, such as number of professors 2024. and completed promotions. • the need for other career paths will be assessed (e.g., a clinical profile etc.). this will be done in collaboration with an advisory recognition of individuals and talent support: group and erasmus mc researchers. • the promotion guidelines for academic staff with a research • the need for horizontal career paths will be assessed, also for profile have been revised and have been implemented on the 1st non-academic staff. of january, 2024. in these revised guidelines, diverse • if necessary, promotion guidelines for these other profiles will backgrounds, talents, and differences between disciplines are be developed and assessed, all while taking diversity into taken into account. account. • care-4-research-talent is a pilot at erasmus mc, offering events, • the annual performance appraisal and evaluation are currently trainings and tools to provide a structured approach to the support undergoing reform. of career development of individual researchers and improved talent management at departments. recognition of open science: • furthermore, erasmus mc offers several programs and courses, • in the upcoming years, erasmus mc will keep stimulating and such as: strengthening open science practices, and will keep developing o diversity & inclusion program: unconscious bias, intercultural the open science component that is part of the portfolio model. communication, and navigating high power structures. furthermore, erasmus mc will keep focusing on a short term o leadership program with training possibilities for starters and implementation of the taverne agreement and the institutional advanced leaders. data repository. o female talent class o female career development o academic career development © 2024, erasmus mc page 4/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 o scientific career guidance recognition of open science • erasmus mc encourages departments and individuals to contribute to and make use of open science practices. on the departmental level, this is done through the allocation of the first income stream as described above. on the individual level, erasmus mc offers help and guidance for researchers on, for instance, open access publishing, fair data, and writing a data management plan. 2. base research assessment primarily on • on january 1st, 2024, a new cv format was introduced which • in q2/q3 of 2024, a calibration session for the committee for qualitative evaluation for which peer review leaves more room for the narrative rather than solely focusing on the promotion of academic staff will be organized, ensuring that is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators. furthermore, in this new cv format, both qualitative and quantitative indicators are responsibly quantitative indicators academics have ample room to describe their involvement in and assessed. contributions to peer-review activities. • in the upcoming years, erasmus mc will organize several training sessions to accommodate qualitative evaluation mechanisms, as well as organizing training sessions based around peer-review. • criteria to assess the quality of applicants of internal grants will be revised. training and guidance for committees will be in place. • as of now, erasmus mc is not planning on actively using research-on-research practices, though this might be subject to change in the future. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research • jif and h-index are no longer used in the promotion for academic • in the upcoming years, we would like to focus on responsibly assessment of journal- and publication- staff. using quantitative indicators to support qualitative assessment. based metrics, in particular inappropriate • jif and h-index are no longer used in the allocation of internal uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- grants. index 4. avoid the use of rankings of research • erasmus mc has a critical stance towards rankings does not no further steps required organizations in research assessment provide information and/or data for (international) rankings • rankings are not used in research(er) assessment 5. commit resources to reforming research • erasmus mc is dedicating 2 fte (until april 2025) personnel to • in the future, the erasmus mc aims to allocate certain assessment as is needed to achieve the implement the recognition & rewards program within the resources to organize meetings, activities, and gatherings in organizational changes committed to erasmus mc. © 2024, erasmus mc page 5/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 • individuals participating in working groups, advisory groups, and order to promote organizational and cultural changes related to other organizational bodies (e.g., talent & innovation council, reforming research assessment. research development office research policy and advice office, etc.) demonstrate a commitment to reforming research assessment through their voluntary contributions, extending beyond the allocated fte resources. 6. review and develop research • the promotion guidelines for academic staff with a research • we are currently working on revising the promotion guidelines assessment criteria, tools and processes profile have been revised and have been implemented on the 1st for academics with an educational profile, and we are exploring of january, 2024. in these revised guidelines, diverse the need for other career paths within the erasmus mc. backgrounds, talents, and differences between disciplines are • the annual performance appraisal and evaluation are currently taken into account. undergoing reform. • the erasmus mc has simultaneously introduced a new cv format that leaves more room for the narrative. • as part of the new model for the allocation of the first income stream (portfolio model), departments are asked to fill out a strategic talent management plan (stmp). this stmp focuses on research talent management within the respective departments, while devoting attention to diversity and inclusion policies and the respectful transition of researchers. • the graduation guidelines for phd candidates have been revised. these new guidelines allow for transparency and prioritize quality over quantity. 7. raise awareness of research • awareness is raised through communication to academics (e.g., • in the upcoming years, erasmus mc wants to raise awareness assessment reform and provide communication via email from the dean to all heads of by organizing several meetings, such as lunch meetings and transparent communication, guidance, and departments, video announcement by the dean, communication panel discussions centered around research assessment and training on assessment criteria and via intranet, q&a sessions etc.). assessment criteria (e.g., responsible use of metrics). processes as well as their use • committees are informed of changes in research assessment through information sessions and calibration sessions. • awareness for open science is raised through the yearly open and responsible science award, which aims to recognize projects that include open, transparent, inclusive and responsible open science practices. • when it comes to external funding schemes, erasmus mc offers several trainings and workshops for academics on personal grants and the use of narrative based cv’s. © 2024, erasmus mc page 6/7 date 30 may 2024 title coara action plan, 2024-2027 8. exchange practices and experiences to • erasmus mc is part of the coara working group “supporting the • the option of joining other coara working groups in the future enable mutual learning within and beyond alignment of research assessment systems with coara in will be explored. the coalition biomedical disciplines through administrative reforms and • in the upcoming years, good practices will be shared within the governance”. erasmus mc. • good practices are exchanged with other universities (unl), university medical centers (nfu), and other institutes in the netherlands through regular meetings and an internet forum (rrview). 9. communicate progress made on • within the erasmus mc, intranet pages are used to communicate • currently, the public website of the erasmus mc does not adherence to the principles and progress and changes regarding the reform of research feature any relevant information on this topic. going forward, implementation of the commitments assessment with erasmus mc staff. the aim is to utilize this platform more. • the dean of the erasmus mc communicates changes and/or progress made through, for instance, letters and pre-recorded video messages. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools • in 2026-2027, erasmus mc will focus on evaluating the based on solid evidence and the state-of- implemented changes. in order to do so, best practices, and the-art in research on research, and make possibly research-on-research, will be used to determine how data openly available for evidence these evaluations should be done. gathering and research © 2024, erasmus mc page 7/7
