università di camerino coara action plan 2024-2027 università di camerino coara working group coordinated by prof. anna maria eleuteri lorenzo di nello emanuela laliscia melissa mancini francesca pompei roberto spurio angela trapananti coara action plan approved by the academic governing bodies on july 24th, 2024 the university of camerino (unicam) joined, in 2022, coara, the coalition for advancing of research evaluation, pro- moted at european level and, later, the italian national chapter, a network of 45 italian organizations, including an- vur, which intends to promote and to implement the coara principles. the main activities of the national working group are aimed at: a. proposing actions to support the implementation of the 10 fundamental commitments (commitments) that con- stitute the coara mission; b. promoting bi-directional relations with the working groups operating at european level, with the aim of compa- ring proposals and results; c. establishing a reasonable and actionable roadmap to implement coara principles and commitments in the 2024- 2027 timeframe. the joining to the coara national chapter has been realized through the signature of the document arra (agree- ment on reforming research assessment), containing all the fundamental principles of coara, the priorities to be pursued and a series of general proposals for the implementation of good practices for the evaluation of research in- stitutions, research projects and researchers. the arra document also examines into details the 10 key commitments of coara, defining, for each one, the objective and the scope together with a reform path for their implementation. the arra document aims at conveying a twofold message: that evaluation should recognise the diversity of research contributions and career paths in research, taking into account the specific nature of the different disciplines, and that each institution should take responsibility, with the available tools but also with new procedures to be implemented, to promote good evaluation practices, giving maximum value to the quality and impact of research, without ever de- rogating from the principles of methodological rigour, reproducibility and integrity. by joining the coara national chapter, unicam is committed to implementing systemic actions, capable of contribu- ting to a path of cultural change that modifies the current evaluation system based almost exclusively on quantitati- ve metrics. the weakness of these quantifiable indicators stems from the fact that “bibliometric indicators tell a story, but not the whole story” (dutch research council, 2019, p. 4). in fact, in order to highlight the variety and the hetero- geneity of academic activities, experiences and skills, it is essential to develop guidelines and procedures leading to the redefinition of research evaluation principles and methods that take into account qualitative aspects in a fair and transparent manner. in this way, all members of the academic community will be able to know the criteria adopted for the evaluation of the research and how they are applied. such changes, for which the quality and impact of research and researchers will be assessed based on more appro- priate criteria and processes, will also include the acknowledging of the open science practices adopted. recently, unicam has developed an open science policy to encourage and support researchers to conduct their research in accordance with the principles of open science. in order to maintain the commitment made in 2005 with the signing of the european charter for researchers, uni- cam continues its path of implementation of the principles set out in the charter as well as in the principles included in the new european charter. in particular, in the pillar 2 on responsible evaluation of research and researchers (coun- cil recommendation of 18 december 2023 on a european framework to attract and retain research, innovation and entrepreneurial talents in europe - annex 2). the main challenges that unicam intends to address are: i) communication and awareness raising of the coara principles by the whole academic community; ii) the connection between the different areas of the university and the schools, essential to carry out a critical analysis of the processes and evaluation criteria, aimed at the regular review and improvement of practices, also with the support of experts outside unicam; iii) cooperation and exchange of information and procedures with other research organisations and evaluation agencies, in order to optimally respond to the challenges that the research evaluation reform process will pose in the near future. considering the guidelines proposed by coara and the complexity of academic institutions, which are aware of the cultural and structural changes that such a reform entails, through this action plan, the university identifies a series of procedures and actions to be implemented in order to redefine the institutional processes of evaluation of research and researchers. the importance recognized to these aspects is demonstrated by the fact that they represent one of the macro-objectives outlined in the university’s strategic plan 2024-2029. the activities of the action plan are classified according to the expected implementation time, short and long term. for each activity, systematically linked to the relevant coara commitments, timeframes and implementation mana- gers shall be indicated, together with objectively measurable indicators to monitor implementation status over time. a actions in the short term (up to the end of 2024) related coara timeframe/ responsibility indicators commitments target 1 to give visibility to the research evaluation reform process, 7, 9 last trimester - delegate for the online dedicating a specific section on the university’s website 2024 implementation publication of that collects the main coara documents, the action plan of university the new web that unicam intends to adopt and any other documents policies for page, dedicated and/or instruments that the university will implement so the european to coara as to make them available for consultation and analysis in research area an open manner both by internal and external actors to - it center unicam, encouraging sharing with a view to facilitating collective progress towards coara. 2 to actively participation in the working groups (wg) of 8 last trimester - vice rector for no. 1 formal coara - national chapter. 2024 research and participation at technology at least one wg transfer - delegate for the implementation of university policies for the european research area 3 to promote the appropriate use of quantitative parameters 3, 4 last trimester - university no. 1 position in the evaluation of research, focusing on qualitative 2024 research board paper signed by aspects (giving a central to the peer review process) - committee the university discouraging the inappropriate use of quantitative for quality governance indicators. to discourage the use of international rankings management of in the evaluation of research institutions. human resources for research b actions in the mid & long term related timeframe/ responsibility indicators (up to the end of 2026) coara target commitments 1 to involve all the university schools in the processes of 6 last trimester university research publication of analysis of current practices and in the improvement of 2025 board no. 1 document research evaluation procedures according to the principles containing and guidelines of coara. information on each school 2 to include in the evaluation system of researchers’ 1, 2, 6 first semester - committee no. 1 proposal performance (esrp) the following activities: 2025 elaboration for quality shared with a) the work carried out by unicam researchers as “peer of a proposal for management of the competent reviewers” (in relation to scientific publications and research integration to human resources university bodies projects) which can be defined as the zero of the critical the competent for research evaluation process of scientific production; university b) revision of the doctoral thesis; bodies. - educational c) participation in national and international doctoral planning and commissions; second half of quality system d) recognised participation in editorial boards (e.g. scientific 2025 , activation unit journal editor). of the approved integration measures. 3 to disseminate coara principles to the university 9, 7 first trimester - committee no. 1 public event community through the involvement of coara european 2026 for quality steering committee members in order to present the state management of of the art of the research evaluation reform and to discuss human resources the integration of coara principles in the italian research for research evaluation system. - vice rector for research and technology transfer - delegate for the implementation of university policies for the european research area - delegate for research quality assessment and assurance (vqr) 4 to monitor the overall editorial activity of each school, 3 first trimester - schools research production of the through the periodic analysis of the scientific production 2025 boards first monitoring of the schools and the production of reports that take - libraries and report to be into account both the aggregated data of the schools and higher education integrated into the trends of development of specific areas of research, in area the university/ bibliometric and non-bibliometric fields. school research review report shared with the relevant bodies of the university 5 to promote e-tools such as “think check submit”, to 7 first trimester - libraries and no. 1 event to help researchers identify the most appropriate journals 2025 higher education present and where they can publish the scientific data produced, and area launch at least to provide a wide-range overview of issues related to one it tool to the publications (licensing, copyright, long-term archiving, unicam academic predatory journals). community 6 to identify (assignment or recruitment) a new professional 5 first semester of - delegate for the no. 1 formal with the following responsibilities: 2025 elaboration implementation assignment/ a) linking the areas (research, personnel, sas-libraries, of a formal of university recruitment quality systems) and the university schools to improve the proposal by the policies for document transparent collection and processing of data on research fpqru the european evaluation practices; research area b) organisation and management of a technical last semester infrastructure making research data available in accordance 2025 - directorate with fair principles; assignment/ general c) interaction with the knowledge transfer manager. recruitment 7 to elaborate guidelines useful for narrative cv writing and last trimester - committee no. 1 publication adoption, in recruitment procedures, of the narrative cv as a 10 2025 (narrative for quality of guidelines tool for evaluating research with the aim to avoid focussing cv guidelines) management of only on bibliometric indicators. human resources no. 1 document first semester for research of approval of 2026 - human resources the competent introduction for research governing in recruitment - human resources bodies about the procedures of unit introduction of the demand for - research and the narrative cv narrative cv. technology in recruitment transfer unit procedures 8 to include in the calls for recruitment the indication of the last trimester - university no. 1 dg provision unicam subscription to coara, highlighting the adherence 9 2026 research board to coara commitments in the evaluation procedure. - human resources unit - directorate general 9 to provide an annual update/revision of this action plan, 9 first semester - committee no. 1 annual taking into account also the contribution deriving from the 2025 for quality meeting on participation in coara international forums during the year. first semester management of document 2026 human resources update/revision for research
