vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación action plan coara 2024-2027 1. summary the universidade de vigo (uvigo) ratified its adherence to the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) in december 2022. the adhesion to coara involves the design of an action plan to improve the quality, execution, and impact of research. uvigo has fulfilled this commitment approving the present action plan, which incorporates the principles of diversity, inclusion, collaboration etc, as the basis for assessment criteria and processes. this program for the progressive reform of internal research evaluation systems takes into account the commitments of the "agreement on reforming research assessment" and the recommendations of the document "support for coara signatories in the preparation of action plans". the action plan also incorporates a consultative and participatory process, involving researchers from various disciplines and career stages to provide their valuable feedback during the initial design phase. moreover, the plan is strategically aligned, fostering synergies and opportunities with other ongoing initiatives at uvigo, such as: • the human resources strategy for researchers (hrs4r), to support a better implementation of the charter principles in its polices and practices • the open, transparent and merit-based recruitment of researchers (otm-r, to ensure that the best person is hired for each position, guaranteeing equal opportunities and access, facilitating developing an international career (cooperation, competition, mobility), and making research careers more attractive. vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación • athena european university, an alliance of ten higher education and research institutions from different geographical areas in europe, to offer student-centred curricula delivered jointly on inter-university campuses, where different mobility options are available. all this in an interdisciplinary cooperative approach to address the problems of today's europe. 2. introduction there's a growing demand within the academic sphere for a reevaluation of research assessment methodologies. initiatives such as the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora), the leiden manifesto for research metrics (2015), and the joint position of the european university association (eua) and science europe (2019) emphasise the urgent need for an actualization of the research evaluation practices. the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) aims to redefine the evaluation of scientific research and represents a collective effort to redesign how research is assessed. aneca's alignment with coara has involved regulatory amendments, notably reflected in the losu and royal decree 678/2023, along with the resolution of 19 december 2023 of the general secretariat of universities on the 2023 criteria for six-year research periods. furthermore, the first national open science strategy (enca) 2023-2027 prioritizes the establishment of new research evaluation mechanisms and an incentives framework to foster open science practices. coara advocates for a qualitative evaluation of research, with peer review as a cornerstone, complemented by responsible use of bibliometric indicators. moreover, coara recognizes the imperative to accommodate the inherent diversity in research outcomes, methodologies, and practices across different disciplines and career stages. furthermore, coara fosters ethical conduct in research, the principles of open science, and the dissemination of research works. by joining coara, the university of vigo embraces all these principles and commitments. vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación 3. assessment of research at universidade de vigo the commitment of the universidade de vigo to the transformation of research towards a more qualitative, transparent, fair, diverse and inclusive evaluation is shown by the fact that the internal calls for research activities have for some time now introduced elements of qualitative evaluation, such as the assessment of the diversity of results beyond publications:  patents,  contracts,  dissemination of results  licensing of research results,  creation of spin-offs, collaboration with companies,  projects with a social impact and more recently, open access criteria. these criteria have already been implemented in some assessment activities at the uvigo, such as: • value merits of scientific production and transfer production. • uvigo research staff mobility calls • predoctorals grants the uvigo wants to foster an evaluation environment that enhances incentives for high- quality or relevant research. with this purpose, uvigo has designed this coara action plan, to gradually increase the significance of quantitative peer review, all through the responsible use of bibliometric indicators. vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación 4. universidade de vigo action plan phases lines actions timeframe description creation of the working group for the elaboration, implementation and monitoring of the coara establishment of the human and material action plan. phase a 2024 coara committee resources establishment of regular follow-up meetings provision of resources make visible the principles of coara and the coara strategy visibility/communication 2024 institution's commitment to them. analysis of the evaluation methods applied to phase b research structure (groups, departments, identification of the diagnosis of research activity researchers) concerning funding, staff selection, 2024 current situation assessment procedures hiring, and academic career progression at the universidade de vigo and in institutions within the national and european context. vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación cultivate awareness and install a culture of training/outreach/awareness 2024 rigorous scientific assessment across the raising institution. involvement of the research career path 2024 design of researchers training paths phase c institutional community involve researchers in the evaluation reform in the change process process collecting their perspectives and public consultation 2024 expectations regarding the enhancement of the evaluation system discussion with stakeholders 2024 involve the rest of the stakeholders in the process definition of the new 2025 selection of the new criteria to be implemented assessment system implementing change phase d tools search for tools to implement 2025 design and creation of the new tools for the new coara criteria system 2026 design a pilot project specifically targeted at pilot initiative for revised refining research incentive mechanisms, aimed at phase e pilot test assessment protocols fostering an environment conducting to research excellence. vicerreitoría de investigación, transferencia e innovación progressive global implementation of revised assessment protocols in global implementation 2026-2027 implementation alignment with coara. disseminate the transformation process of phase f dissemination & universidade de vigo communication activities 2027 outreach foster collaboration and knowledge exchange with other universities and stakeholders.
