university of debrecen coara action plan 2024-2027 general overview: mission statement of the university of debrecen as an institution of excellence of the higher education in hungary, in the spirit of the magna charta of the european universities, the university of debrecen contributes to the development of the universal science and the hungarian society by the highest level, multifaceted and multidisciplinary training, research and development. this mission is performed jointly by the lecturers, employees and students, by committed to quality and by cooperating with hungarian and international partners. as a result of this: • the university of debrecen can be characterised as an internationally renowned institution of education, scientific research and development in the field of medical and health sciences, agricultural sciences, humanities, health sciences, legal sciences, economic sciences, technical sciences, pedagogy, social sciences, natural sciences and music; • by aiming efficiency, flexibility, the increase of responsiveness, dynamic development and the rationalisation of management, it becomes a more and more determining intellectual centre of eastern hungary, with a close connection of the surrounding regions of the neighbouring countries; • by considering the international processes and the compliance with social demands, it intends to release higher and higher-qualified professionals by the extension of the higher-level vocational training, the elaboration and performance of the programmes of the multi-cycle training (bachelor, master, phd), by the diversity of postgraduate trainings, continuous further education and the utilisation of distant education, with a view to the lifelong learning; • as a research university and the central institution of the regional corporate innovation network, it is one of the key actors of economic development as well, therefore, it facilitates the cooperation of the private sector, the business life, the local government and the central government in the field of regional and transboundary education, research and development programmes. the university of debrecen is able to prominently serve hungary and the hungarian citizens primarily based on its mission statement, by preserving its diversity, unity and systematic activity in every education level, from the pre-school education until the adult training. in addition to serving the education, research, curative and preventive activity and agriculture, the institution is committed to reinforce its relationships with the social and economic sector and as the third mission of higher education, to perform its cultural and sports tasks. 1 research assessment and its reform: commitment scope action timeframe 1 recognise the changes in assessment practices 1.1 assessment of the january diversity of should enable recognition of the current research 2024 contributions to, broad diversity of: evaluation system and careers in, • valuable contributions that through performance research in researchers make to science evaluation of the accordance with and for the benefit of society, various faculties of the needs and including diverse outputs the university of nature of the beyond journal publications debrecen. research. and irrespective of the language in which they are 1.2 comparison of the august communicated; current research 2024 • practices that contribute to evaluation system robustness, openness, with the expectations transparency, and the set by coara inclusiveness of research and 1.3 development of the research process discipline-specific including: peer review, and research career teamwork and collaboration; recommendations • activities including teaching, based on the leadership, supervision, collected training and mentoring. it is information. also important that assessment facilitates the recognition and valorisation of diverse roles and careers in research, including: data steward, software engineer and data scientist roles, technical roles, public outreach, science diplomacy, science advice and science communicator roles to name a few. 2 2 base research research assessment should rely further development of 2025-27 assessment primarily on qualitative assessment the institutional current primarily on for which peer review is central, research information qualitative supported by responsibly used systems (cris) in order to evaluation for quantitative indicators where present the peer review which peer appropriate. peer review is the most activities of researchers. review is central, robust method known for assessing supported by quality and has the advantage that it responsible use of is in the hands of the research quantitative community. it is important that peer indicators review processes are designed to meet the fundamental principles of rigor and transparency: expert assessment, transparency, impartiality, appropriateness, confidentiality, integrity and ethical considerations, gender, equality and diversity. to address the biases and imperfections to which any method is prone, the research community re- assesses and improves peer review practices regularly. revised, or potentially new, criteria, tools and processes appropriate for assessing quality could be explored alongside peer review. moving towards assessment practices that rely more heavily on qualitative methods may require additional efforts from researchers. researchers should be recognised for these efforts and their contributions to reviewing peers’ work should be valued as part of their career progression. 3 3 abandon inappropriate uses of journal- and inappropriate uses publication-based metrics in research in research assessment should be abandoned. in assessment of particular, this means moving away journal- and from using metrics like the journal publicationbased impact factor (jif), article influence metrics, in score (ais) and h-index as proxies for particular quality and impact. ‘inappropriate inappropriate uses uses’ include: of journal impact • relying exclusively on author- factor (jif) and based metrics (e.g. counting h-index papers, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, format or language; • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact. 4 avoid the use of recognising that the international • to examine the december rankings of rankings most often referred to by institutional 2024 research research organisations are currently implementation of organisations in not ‘fair and responsible’ , the criteria the more than our research these rankings use should not trickle rank initiative assessment down to the evaluation of individual • raise awareness on researchers, research teams and the limitations of research units. research rankings and ensure april 2024 organisations should also be mindful that all materials that and that public communication (e.g. the refer to league tables ongoing active advertising of an institution’s or rankings clearly rank) can contribute to the perception acknowledge their that research quality conflates with limitations ranking positions. where ranking approaches are deemed unavoidable, as may be the case in forms of evaluation beyond the scope of this agreement such as benchmarking and performance reviews of countries or institutions, the methodological limitations of such approaches should be acknowledged, and institutions should avoid trickle-down effects on research and researcher assessment. 4 5 commit resources resource allocation by assessment • engage with coara january to reforming authorities and research funding and working groups and 2024 and research performing organisations is a national chapter to ongoing assessment as is necessary condition for reforming support systemic needed to achieve assessment practices. resources reform, exchange the organisational should be allocated as is needed for good practice and changes each organisation to achieve the monitor global committed to changes that will enable adherence to progress, the principles and to implement the • raise awareness of commitments. this includes research assessment resources to: reform at the • implement changes in institutional level in research assessment, the different career including planning and status (phd students, progress monitoring; library and • raise awareness among all publishing actors; committee), • educate, train and support • the use of plain researchers and any other language summaries staff involved in assessment, in order to popularize including peer-reviewers and the highlighted assessors; and articles, • support the necessary infrastructure such as tools and services for the transparent collection and processing of data on research assessment practices. 6 6.1 criteria for criteria for the assessment of • review current january- units and research performing units and research assessment august institutions organisations, including universities, criteria and their 2024 with the direct research centres, and research implementation, involvement of infrastructures, should be reviewed ensuring that these research and adapted, and new criteria are robust and organisations and developed where needed, based on comply with researchers at all evidence. this should be done in close responsible research career stages, collaboration with assessors and assessment review and those that will be assessed, including principles. develop criteria research organisations and for assessing researchers. the changes should research units and increase the ability to assess quality 5 research by enabling recognition of all performing contributions to quality research by organisations, research units and institutions. such while promoting recognition includes that of early interoperability sharing of data and results, open collaboration, teamwork; and consideration of contributions to the research ecosystem, knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact. national / regional / organisational authorities and evaluation agencies should coordinate to ensure their methodologies and processes are interoperable, while simultaneously respecting the necessary adaptation to each context. 6.2 criteria for criteria, tools and processes should • develop cris 2025-27 projects and be reviewed and developed together capacity/reporting researchers with researchers in different functionality that with the direct disciplines and at different career allows consistent and involvement of stages; and should enable recognition accurate monitoring researchers at all of the diversity of research activities of a range of career stages, and practices that contribute to qualitative and review and research quality, including diverse quantitative develop criteria, outputs in different languages. this information, where tools and should increase the ability to assess staff can easily view, processes for the quality by enabling recognition of all amend or challenge assessment of contributions to quality research from information relating research projects, research projects and by researchers to them. research teams and research teams. this includes and researchers recognition of early sharing of data that are adapted and results, open collaboration, and to their context of teamwork. reformed practices for application assessing individual researchers should consider future potential alongside track record and take into account researchers’ individual contexts and careers. they should also recognise that researchers cannot excel in all types of tasks and provide for a framework that allows researchers to contribute to the definition of their research goals and aspirations. research assessment by 6 research funders should consider disciplinary, multi-, inter-, and trans- disciplinary research as well as contributions to knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact. 7 raise awareness without widespread awareness of the • raise awareness of january of research reform and training of those assessed research assessment 2024 and assessment and, crucially, assessors, progress will reform at the ongoing reform and be slow - if not impossible. institutional level in provide organisations should be clear and the different career transparent transparent about assessment stages (phd students, communication, processes and the tools and criteria library and guidance, and they use. they should make guidance publishing training on on their assessment approaches committee), assessment openly available and train those • provide training criteria and involved in the assessment process. sessions and processes as well they should allow those assessed to workshops for as their use have access to the criteria, data and assessment panels, april 2024 reviews or deliberation outcomes committees, and and used in their assessment within the faculty members to ongoing limits of confidentiality. particular ensure they attention should be paid to raising understand and awareness among researchers at all adhere to assessment career stages. practices 8 exchange while respecting each other’s • hunor experiences january practices and autonomy, organisations should share exchange 2024 and experiences to practices and experiences to facilitate • hungarian national ongoing enable mutual mutual learning. this exchange chapter learning within should include contributing to the and beyond the development of guidance and coalition common approaches in order to minimise contradictions or incompatibilities between the assessment practices used by different organisations. it should also include sharing of lessons learned to ensure continuous mutual improvements. 7 9 communicate demonstrating progress made • hungarian progress made on towards implementing the national chapter adherence to the commitments and adherence to the principles and principles is an important part of this implementation of initiative. organisations should the commitments commit to regularly update each other and their communities on their adherence and progress. this process involves being open to scrutiny from their own communities, sharing successes as well as challenges, and communicating their experiences to facilitate collective progress 10 evaluate practices, growing evidence shows that current • to examine the 2025-2027 criteria and tools assessment processes that rely on institutional based on solid publicationand journal-based metrics implementation to evidence and the are prone to multiple biases. as scope framework for state-of-the-art in approaches using more qualitative research evaluation research on research assessment are piloted by research, and several organisations (e.g. narrative make data openly and evidence-based cvs, new available for assessment frameworks and evidence indicators), it is important to evaluate gathering and and monitor their impact based on research evidence and rigorous methods. organisations should contribute to the evidence base on research assessment in order to make this possible. for example, it could be achieved by making data that can be used for research on research available, by participating in research on research, or by funding research on research. data sharing should be the minimum commitment and data should be shared through open infrastructure, while respecting personal data protection. 8
