kyiv national economic university named after vadym hetman coara action plan introduction kyiv national economic university joined the coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) in september 2022 and signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra). kneu commits to working on the reforming research assessment and on the process of reviewing and developing its criteria and tools according to the core commitments. reflect on your strategy and change approach what guiding principles do you (and your community) think are priorities in your approach to reform? kneu considers a list of principles as priorities in our approach to reform such as professionalism, mutual respect, transparency, gender equality, non-discrimination, diversity, inclusiveness, creativity. what is the process by which your organisation will work on the reform? kneu is working towards reforming the research assessment system and welcomes the initiatives coming from coara. kneu will work on the reform by providing research on research, investigating best practices of research assessment, taking part in coara activities, creating working groups at the university to improve our internal research assessment procedures, implement new tools and criteria. internal assessment of researchers and departments is conducted annually according to the provision on monitoring the innovative contribution of departments (research and teaching staff) to the formation of a high university rating during scientific certification, (current version accepted 17.11.2022). it includes a number of criteria for individual researchers and departments. kneu plans to improve its methodology in the process of reform. involve your institutional community in the change process how are you planning to involve relevant actor groups (such as researchers at different career stages, research support staff, administrators, and others, depending on the scope of your organisation)? kneu is planning to involve relevant actor groups such as researchers at different career stages, research support staff, administrators, in the process of reforming research assessment. different employees (researchers at different career stages) are involved in the working group that has prepared the action plan. working groups that will prepare all the important required documents on the assessment reform will have representatives from different departments of the university, researchers and research support staff, administrators. according to the internal policies of the university all the documents, procedures concerning research should be approved by the scientific and expert council at the first stage, and then approved and adopted by the academic council of the university. how will you share good practices (internally and with others)? kyiv national economic university will share good practices internally by organising webinars and trainings for employees, implementing best practices into internal policies. the university will share good practices with others on its web site. identify key challenges to address have you identified the identify key challenges to address key challenges/barriers in your organisation with regards to reforming research assessment and the adherence to the action plan? for which does your institution have the power/authority/resources to address? the key challenges in reforming research assessment in kneu are connected to the funding model by the ministry of education and science that is based not only on the qualitative points but mainly on quantitative points (such as number of publications). according to the roadmap on scientific-innovative system integration into european research area, provided by the ministry of education and science, one of its targets is to continue to improve the system of evaluating the activities of scientific institutions, scientific activities in institutions of higher education in accordance with eu practices and taking into account national specifics. indicators, used for assessment of the effectiveness of institutions of higher education, take into account the number of publications indexed in the wos and/or scopus databases and publications included in the first and second quartiles. in addition, core funding is provided to only a limited number of universities. very few projects are selected through the mes competition. this has negative and indirect effects on researchers. creation and further regulation of endowment funds is a general problem of most universities in ukraine. unclear borders of institutional autonomy postpones utilization of creative strategies. demographic decline may lead to disruptions in higher education in ukraine. identified challenges cannot be addressed at the level of the university. reforming assessment methodology on the national level is needed in order to overcome some barriers. at the university level internal procedures of the research assessment are used and can be improved. , how does your organisation plan to enable recognition of more diverse contributions to research? kneu uses an internal procedure of ranking departments and academic staff on the basis of their innovative contribution. the university plans to improve its methodology and create diversified criteria for assessing researchers at different stages of their carrier, which will be implemented into internal methodology in order to recognise different contributions to research. how does your organisation plan to enable greater diversity in career paths and profiles? kneu has developed a platform that will allow intensifying scientific research by raising awareness of the research areas of university researchers, forming joint collaborations in the preparation of publications (scientific articles in various publications, monographs, etc.), projects for participation in national and international competitions. how does your organisation plan to accommodate qualitative evaluation mechanisms and base the use of metrics in a way that is aligned with your organisation’s value system? kneu plans to constantly work on the qualitative component of innovation monitoring, improve the evaluation system, expand the range of indicators that would take into account various aspects of scientific activity and meet the values of the university. , how does your organisation plan to mitigate reliance on jif and h-index? kneu expands the list of indicators that form the basis for assessing the effectiveness of scientific work to mitigate reliance on jif and h-index. . how does your organisation plan to mitigate reliance on organisation rankings? the results of the ratings are studied, but the main priorities in internal research assessment are determined by the kneu development strategy. does your organisation plan to pilot or implement alternative/new assessment criteria, tools, and processes? kneu plans to review criteria for the assessment of research and researchers that are used at the university. new criteria and tools will be developed and implemented where needed. awareness of research assessment reform does your institution plan to provide training, guidance and support to assessment panels, committees, and juries? kneu plans to provide research on research, benchmark best practices of research assessment in order to improve its own criteria and ranking process. on the basis of such knowledge trainings, webinars and other activities are planned to support assessment committees, working groups. practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and beyond the coalition how does your organisation plan to exchange practices and foster exchange of good practices in national and international contexts? kneu constantly cooperates with its national and international partners to exchange experience in the evaluation of scientific activities. such cooperation takes place at different levels: at scientific forums and events, in the process of implementing international cooperation projects. kneu plans to organise mutual events with our partners to exchange good practices in both national and international context. kneu plans sharing its practices and ideas within coara community as well. how will your organisation ensure the transparent communication of the organisation’s research evaluation processes within and outside of the organisation? kneu annually conducts innovation monitoring based on clear, specific, transparent criteria. its results are published on all resources (web site, social media) and official events. how does your institution plans to monitor and (re)evaluate its assessment criteria, tools, and processes? what will be the frequency? who will be involved in the evaluation? kneu conducts monitoring on an annual basis, evaluating both individual researchers and departments. department of scientific information is involved into the process of assessment. the methodology is evaluated and improved by academic and administrative staff and is approved by the scientific and expert council, and then approved and adopted by the academic council of the universi
