coara action plan towards the advanced research assessment of the cas institutes and their research teams july 2024 background the czech academy of sciences (hereinafter the “cas”) is the largest public non-university scientific institution in the czech republic. it conducts research through its 54 institutes, including 2 research-infrastructure institutes, which are established by the cas as public research institutions. research by the cas covers scientific fields from mathematics, physics, earth sciences, life and chemical sciences to humanities and social sciences. the main mission of the cas and its institutes is to carry out high-quality scientific research at the frontiers of knowledge that respects the current and anticipated needs of our society. the cas thus places great emphasis on the freedom of scientific inquiry, regardless of whether the research is motivated by socio- economic benefit, the desire for knowledge, or both. the cas strives to be the highest quality scientific institution in the czech republic and to achieve the standards of leading institutions in scientifically advanced countries in research and professional activities and institutional management. to achieve this, cas management has been organising periodic evaluations for its institutes and their research teams since the beginning of the cas existence in 1993. the methodology and evaluation results are published transparently on its website (here). the cas is continuously developing its evaluation system based on feedback from the main actors in the evaluation, as well as based on experience from other countries. when developing its evaluation system, the cas seeks to reflect new challenges arising from changes in the scientific environment and society and from international initiatives that support a responsible approach to research assessment emphasising the quality of research and its societal relevance and their assessment based on appropriate approaches and criteria. therefore, the cas has in the past incorporated important elements to strengthen the quality of assessment into its evaluation system: informed peer review, independence, formative feedback, transparency, field specialisation and, with regard to the limited size of the czech r&d&i environment, predominantly foreign experts conducting evaluation. in 2013, the cas joined the san francisco declaration on research assessment and implemented the declaration’s recommendations into its evaluation system. the principles of the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) reflect long-term trends in the field of improving evaluation systems and are in accordance with the cas long- term goal to improve the quality of research assessment. the cas therefore joined the initiative preparing arra in 2022, signed the agreement and joined the broader coalition of coara signatories. in accordance with its commitment under the agreement on reforming research assessment, the cas presents below an action plan that will be applied in the process of preparing and implementing the upcoming evaluation of its institutes and their research teams for the period 2020-2024. the action plan and the impact of each implemented activity will be assessed as part of regular reflection on evaluation after its completion. 2/9 cas – coara action plan main challenges the cas strives to ensure that its evaluation system is of the highest possible quality and contributes to the set objectives, but it is also shaped to certain extent by the external environment and influenced by a number of external and internal conditions, which are challenges with which the evaluation system must deal. the external environment and conditions consist primarily of national legislation and the national evaluation system which serves as a joint framework including the cas, as well as universities and resort research organisations. this uniform evaluation system for diverse research organisations is unusual in scientifically advanced countries, introduces a number of limitations into the evaluation system and its flexibility. however, the national evaluation system is currently undergoing reflection, and the cas greatly welcomes the fact that not only the bodies that are responsible for the preparation of the national evaluation, as well as many important actors in the czech republic have joined the arra initiative. this could be an indication that evaluation in the czech republic, not exclusively at the national level, will continue to improve, cultivate and approach international standards. the internal conditions are represented by the cas environment and its organisational division into 54 differently sized institutes and more than 400 differently sized research teams active in a wide range of research areas, including interdisciplinary ones. it is necessary to ensure that evaluation is appropriate and useful, as well as feasible and associated with the smallest possible administrative burden. the cas evaluation system thus faces the following main challenges: 1. to carry out evaluation in accordance with czech legislation and the national evaluation methodology. 2. to ensure a comprehensive assessment of 54 institutes and their teams from different research areas, some of which conduct interdisciplinary research covering multiple disciplines and some of which have the nature of research infrastructure. 3. through assessment, to contribute to improving research quality, international competitiveness and cultivating an environment in accordance with the cas mission and its long-term priorities. 4. to ensure a balance between the benefits and costs of evaluation. objectives in accordance with the cas long-term approach and current priorities in relation to research assessment and arra commitments, the cas has identified the following objectives on which it will continue to work and where it sees room to make the most impactful changes, with regard to the aforementioned challenges. 1. continue to strengthen the qualitative approach to assessment, abandon the inappropriate use of bibliometric indicators based on the influence of journals as proxies for the quality and/or impact of research and outputs. 2. deepen the formative aspect of assessment, enhance the quality of feedback obtained from international peers. 3. strengthen respect for differences in various fields of research, including interdisciplinary research. 3/9 cas – coara action plan 4. find more appropriate ways to assess and appreciate different outputs and results, especially the results of applied research. 5. continue to raise awareness of the meaning, principles and approach to research assessment in the scientific community. 6. simplify assessment to focus on priority areas that are crucial to the mission of the cas and its institutes. 7. include open science in assessment and support the institutes in their conceptual approach to the principles of open science. 4/9 cas – coara action plan operational action plan 2024─2027 the coara commitments cas actions 1. recognise the diversity of contributions 1.1 through evaluation, support the to, and careers in, research in accordance concept of human resources development with the needs and nature of the research. and the creation of conditions enabling researchers to play different roles and purpose: this commitment will broaden pursue different careers in research. recognition of the diverse practices, activities and careers in research, considering the 1.2 appreciate the service of researchers specific nature of research disciplines and to the research community (e.g. other research endeavours. involvement in peer review of journal articles, involvement in assessment of institutes, projects, researchers, etc., organising scientific conferences). 1.3 recognise the contributions of research-service units for research and its societal relevance. 1.4 support the implementation of open science principles with emphasis on the involvement of researchers from the cas institutes in specific roles enabling effective implementation of open science in the institute. 2. base research assessment primarily on 2.1 set up qualitative peer review as a main qualitative evaluation for which peer principle for assessing the quality of review is central, supported by responsible research work in terms of its value to use of quantitative indicators. scientific knowledge and its benefits to society. purpose: this commitment will enable the move towards research assessment criteria 2.2 use a narrative approach to the that focus primarily on quality, while assessment providing a wider context recognising that responsible use of enabling the use of a wider range of quantitative indicators can support information. assessment where meaningful and relevant, which is context dependent. 2.3 continue to involve highly erudite, independent experts in the assessment, with a transparent way of nominating them to evaluation bodies (commissions) and appropriate rewards for their work. 5/9 cas – coara action plan 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research 3.1 abandon bibliometric indicators of assessment of journal- and publication- journals as proxies for quality and/or the based metrics, in particular inappropriate impact of research, do not use simplistic uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- jif/ais quartile-based statistics in index assessments. purpose: this commitment will reduce the 3.2 as part of qualitative peer review, also dominance of a narrow set of quantitative assess institutions’ strategy for supporting journal- and publication-based metrics. high-quality and responsible publishing. 3.3 when assessing selected (the best) scientific results, perform an assessment in the full range of their quality and contribution (scientific quality, significance, societal relevance, ...). 4. avoid the use of rankings of research 4.1 draw attention to the limited indicative organisations in research assessment value and limits of various rankings, especially those based on counting purpose: this commitment will help avoid that publications and bibliometric indicators, metrics used by international rankings, which which can significantly disadvantage small are inappropriate for assessing researchers, disciplines or small institutions. trickle down to research and researcher assessment. it will help the research 4.2 as part of assessment, do not create community and research organisations regain comparisons between institutes across the autonomy to shape assessment practices, disciplines, even those that are close to rather than having to abide by criteria and each other, as it is not possible to obtain methodologies set by external commercial indicators that would enable robust and companies. this could include retaining objective comparisons. control over ranking methodologies and data. 5. commit resources to reforming research 5.1 increase the allocation of funds and assessment as is needed to achieve the staffing for the preparation and organisational changes committed to implementation of changes in assessment, including the creation of supporting purpose: this commitment will ensure that information systems, education, training organisations allocate the necessary and evaluation of the impact of resources, whether in the form of budget or implemented changes to assessment. staff capacity, to improve research assessment practices within their agreed 5.2 continue to ensure and involve a timeframe. preparatory team including scientists from different disciplines, with management experience, experience in assessment (its implementation and design) and international experience, who will prepare a proposal for the implementation of the aforementioned changes in academic evaluation for the period 2020-2024 on the basis of respective analyses. 6. review and develop research note: applies to section 6.1; section 6.2 assessment criteria, tools and processes applies to the assessment of internal cas programmes and will be subject to a subsequent institutional change. 6/9 cas – coara action plan 6.1 criteria for units and institutions 6.1.1 actively cooperate with national authorities on the preparation of a national with the direct involvement of research methodology, participate in joint organisations and researchers at all career discussions, find opportunities for stages, review and develop criteria for synergies and complementarity of assessing research units and research evaluation systems at the national level and performing organisations, while promoting at the level of the cas. interoperability 6.1.2 for mutual harmonisation of purpose: this commitment will ensure that individual evaluation systems, be as national / regional / organisational authorities interoperable and transparent as possible, and evaluation agencies review and, where i.e. harmonise evaluation systems by needed, develop criteria for the assessment of sharing methodologies and assessment research performing units and organisations, results in a timely and open way, both with in accordance with the principles. it will foster assessors and those assessed, and the responsible use of metrics in assessing between individual institutions, with respect research performing units and organisations, for their individual differences. and help to prevent contradictions or incompatibilities between the assessment of 6.1.3 continue to prepare the cas research, researchers and research evaluation – setting criteria, tools and performing organisations. it will also assessment processes based on feedback safeguard the interoperability of adapted on past evaluations from all actors or newly developed assessment processes. (assessors and those assessed), as well as on data, analyses and alternative possible solutions and their discussion with representatives from different scientific fields. make further use of the experience of research assessment in scientifically advanced countries and the recommendations of professional initiatives. 6.1.4 redefine and reduce the assessment criteria to ensure a better balance between the benefits of assessment and its costs (especially time costs) in order to make assessment more beneficial and effective. 6.1.5 appreciate the application of open science practices in the evaluation and for this purpose set up a set of recommendations at the cas level that will enable the development of systems to support open science and the implementation of its principles at all cas institutes. 7. raise awareness of research 7.1 communicate openly and transparently assessment reform and provide with all actors in the evaluation about transparent communication, guidance, and evaluation objectives, criteria, tools and training on assessment criteria and processes through personal discussions at processes as well as their use institutes, thematic workshops, trainings and support materials for the evaluation. 7/9 cas – coara action plan purpose: this commitment will ensure that 7.2 raise awareness of the reform of organisations raise awareness of the reform research assessment, the cas among all actors. it will ensure that involvement in this and other initiatives, and organisations transparently communicate the raise awareness of the aims of these criteria, tools and processes used for research initiatives. assessment and train researchers and assessors in their use. 8. exchange practices and experiences to 8.1 monitor trends in assessment systems enable mutual learning within and beyond in advanced countries and the ways in the coalition which these systems deal with crucial challenges in assessment. purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations exchange and make use of 8.2 be in contact with representatives from information for mutual learning. it will help other countries who are involved in the avoid fragmentation, contribute to the assessment and be active in the national coherence of assessment practices between community that deals with research organisations, and enable researcher mobility. assessment. it also will allow those further ahead to share approaches and lessons learned, to benefit 8.3 mutually share the experience gained those who have further to go on their reform from the evaluation with other entities in the journey. czech republic. 9. communicate progress made on 9.1 perform a reflection of the changes and adherence to the principles and activities implemented under this action implementation of the commitments plan and openly share experience of the implementation of these changes. purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations update one another on the progress made. it will foster careful self- reflection and monitoring of their own adherence to the principles and progress towards meeting the commitments. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools 10.1 after the completion of the evaluation based on solid evidence and the state-of- for the period 2020-2024, provide and the-art in research on research, and make process feedback on evaluation from all data openly available for evidence actors (experts from other countries and gathering and research institutes assessed) and assess the chosen approach, criteria and tools used in relation purpose: this commitment will ensure that to the evaluation aims in an objective assessment approach decisions are evidence manner. informed. it will help organisations reflect on their own processes, gain understanding 10.2 openly share evaluation results and about whether assessment practices achieve “assessment of the evaluation” with the the desired goals, and engage in evolutive research community and the wider public assessment based on new evidence as it through publicly accessible platforms. becomes available. it will also help to ensure control and ownership of research assessment data by the research community. 8/9 cas – coara action plan key milestones and timeline analyze and design prepare implement reflect and discuss metodology implementation changes in share changes evaluation experiences diskuse změn hodnocení sdílení zkušeností approval and identification of workshops and realization of the reflection of the implementation of challenges, gap trainings about evaluation, changes, obtaining the changes to the analysis, discussion evaluation for implementaion of feedback, sharing of cas evaluation and plan proposal for different target changes in process experiences and methodology 2020– cas evaluation groups of the evaluation practices 2024 9/2020 – 7/2024 10/2024 12/2024 – 1/2026 1/2025 – 2/2026 7/2025 – 12/2027 the czech academy of sciences will demonstrate progress towards reviewing, developing and evaluating criteria, tools and processes that fulfil the core commitments, with a touch point at the end of 2027, by which time the cas will have worked through at least one cycle of review and development of the assessment criteria, tools and processes in line with this action plan. timeline corresponds with undergoing preparations of the evaluation cycle for the period 2020-2024 which has already started in 2020. coara commitments have been incorporated into these preparations. 9/9 cas – coara action plan
