the university of milan has been committed for years in supporting open science and in underlying criteria of transparency, accessibility and reproducibility. for years, the openness of publications and data has been supported with ad hoc fundings, extensive training courses especially dedicated to early career researchers, a diamond university press, and the communication of the results achieved at the national and international level. open science is one of the goals of the university's strategic plan, which aims to implement at least 6 of the european commission's 8 pillars. consequently, openness, transparency and reproducibility are also among the goals of departments, research groups and individuals researchers, whose research results are reported publicly in reports and dashboards. the university has also recently joined the barcelona declaration on open research information, reaffirming its existing commitment from 2023 to the exclusive use of open data for research analysis and monitoring. over the past 10 years, therefore, the university has worked to make a cultural change effective, working on training but also on open and transparent documentation of achievements. in this, collaboration with european alliances has been crucial. all that considered, the time is ripe to initiate a series of short- and medium-term actions, described in this action plan, that take into consideration the state of the art in the institution and the results already achieved, the challenges posed by the national context and the constraints imposed by the ministry of research, which therefore represents an interlocutor whom to deal with together with all the other signatory institutions and the members of the national chapter. presented to the pqa on may 23 to the or on may 27, to the ndv on june 7 2024 approved by the academic senate on june 11, 2024 approved by the board of directors on june 25, 2024 version 1 (prepared by paola galimberti) università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 1 scope actions timeframe 1.recognise the diversity of the university also recognizes the introduction of a third mission from 2025 contributions to, and careers in, importance of transparency and and an os dimension in the salary research in accordance with the reproducibility of research increment procedures (e.g. it is needs and nature of the research processes through specific asked to include relevant achievements, actions designed to reward including not only publications, but also datasets, software, services, and so on) purpose: this commitment will dedicated efforts such as data broaden recognition of the diverse curation, preregistration or practices, activities and careers in preprint publication. research, considering the specific the university also recognizes the nature of research disciplines and commitment and involvement of other research endeavours. professors and researchers in diamond open access initiatives such as editing journals or writing textbooks for students 2. base research assessment training on peer review ad hoc courses will be provided 2024 a pilot training primarily on qualitative evaluation (unbiased, equitable and for early career researchers to from 2025 a regular training for which peer review is central, transparent). raise awareness toward fair and supported by responsible use of the university recognizes the equitable (open) peer review quantitative indicators importance of the peer review in the process of quality assurance purpose: this commitment will of research and considers peer enable the move towards research review training for younger assessment criteria that focus researchers fundamental for a primarily on quality, while cultural change. 2025 università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 2 recognising that responsible use of publication of a regulation on the quantitative indicators can awareness in the use of acceptable use of ai in research support assessment where automated tools (ai) activities meaningful and relevant, which is context dependent. establishing an environment that the university is also committed, starting from 2024 can critically address the as it has been in the past, to challenges of scholarly organizing events on qualitative communication assessment and its implementation in different disciplinary areas 3. abandon inappropriate uses in within a rather complex frame guidelines for the internal from 2025 research assessment of journal- with obligations stemming from commissions (respectful of the and publication-based metrics, in the ministry finding a way in ministerial rules) will be issued particular inappropriate uses of which the purpose of the and their implementation will be journal impact factor (jif) and h- evaluation is not to avoid monitored index recourse, but to select the most purpose: this commitment will suitable cvs for the specific reduce the dominance of a narrow position set of quantitative journal and publication-based metrics 4. avoid the use of rankings of the university is committed to progressive and further reduction from 2025 research organisations in research put no emphasis on ranking and in participation in rankings, along assessment to explain their nature and scope with better and more complete to the community. communication of what the purpose: this commitment will university does and its strengths help avoid that metrics used by with respect to the use of international rankings, which are quantitative indicators, governing inappropriate for assessing bodies have approved a researchers, trickle down to document on the responsible use research and researcher of metrics assessment. it will help the research community and research università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 3 organisations regain the autonomy to shape assessment practices, rather than having to abide by criteria and methodologies set by external commercial companies. this could include retaining control over ranking methodologies and data 5. commit resources to reforming the university is committed to among the first signatories of the ongoing research assessment as is needed demonstrate the validity of open barcelona declaration, the to achieve the organisational interoperable infrastructures for university is engaged and will changes committed to research evaluation at the level engage in the implementation of of areas, groups, departments. multidimensional public purpose: this commitment will dashboards. the first one will ensure that organisations allocate describe the university's the necessary resources, whether collaborations and their in the form of budget or staff intensity. capacity, to improve research collaboration with the computer assessment practices within their science department and other agreed timeframe. universities will be crucial 6. review and develop research creating a coherent framework initiating advocacy efforts toward starting from 2025 assessment criteria, tools and at the regional and national the region and ministries (health processes levels while also taking into and research ministries) together account the assessment exercises with other coara signatories 6.1 criteria for units and taking place in different institutions with the direct ministries. involvement of research in this, the collaboration with organisations and researchers at other national institutions all career stages, review and signatories of coara is crucial develop criteria for assessing also taking into account the research units and research roadmap of anvur performing organisations, while promoting interoperability università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 4 for more than two decades, the purpose: this commitment will university has been working in ensure that national / regional / synergy with the legue of organisational authorities and european research intensive evaluation agencies review and, universities leru, on various where needed, develop criteria issues including research for the assessment of research evaluation both at the institution performing units and and individual researcher level by organisations, in accordance with acquiring and processing, through the principles. it will foster the leru , all the european responsible use of metrics in commission's guidance assessing research performing units and organisations, and help to prevent contradictions or incompatibilities between the assessment of research, researchers and research performing organisations. it will also safeguard the interoperability of adapted or newly developed assessment processes. 6. review and develop research an analysis of existing processes analysis and review of indicators from 2025 assessment criteria, tools and and criteria is essential to used for different processes, processes understand what the scope for starting with internal ones: intervention may be, taking into distribution of university funds, 6.2 criteria for projects and account the constraints and salary increases researchers with the direct specificities of the disciplines involvement of researchers at all career stages, review and develop criteria, tools and processes for the assessment of research projects, research teams and università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 5 researchers that are adapted to their context of application purpose: this commitment will enable recognition of the diverse research activities and practices through the revision and development of assessment criteria, tools, and processes. it will ensure that organisations review their processes and make tangible changes by developing existing or new assessment approaches, individually or in collaboration with others, in accordance with the principles 7. raise awareness of research the university already offers the university plans to increase from 2024 assessment reform and provide courses on evaluation, the training on evaluation criteria transparent communication, distorting effects of entirely particularly the pros and cons of guidance, and training on quantitative evaluation with a quantitative and qualitative assessment criteria and processes warning, however, also to so- systems as well as their use called predatory peer review practices and review mills. purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations raise awareness of the reform among all actors. it will ensure that organisations transparently communicate the criteria, tools and processes used for research assessment and train researchers and assessors in their use. università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 6 8. exchange practices and continue with the exchange of continued participation in ongoing experiences to enable mutual experience and information with national chapter tasks learning within and beyond the members of the national chapter coalition and in the different working groups purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations exchange and make use of information for mutual learning. it will help avoid fragmentation, contribute to the coherence of assessment practices between organisations, and enable researcher mobility. it also will allow those further ahead to share approaches and lessons learned, to benefit those who have further to go on their reform journey. 9. communicate progress made on communication and sharing of publishing our coara roadmap on from 2024 adherence to the principles and progress made against the goals public platforms once finalized implementation of the defined in this roadmap should commitments be done periodically to the entire monitoring the roadmap community and governing bodies. implementation purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations update one another on the progress made. it will foster careful self-reflection and monitoring of their own adherence to the principles and progress towards meeting the commitments. 10. evaluate practices, criteria the university periodically monitoring of the different ongoing and tools based on solid evidence assesses the adherence of dimension of open science, and the state-of-the-art in scientific production to open publication of reports on the università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 7 research on research, and make science criteria, both through a different aspects (also critical) of data openly available for evidence dashboard that measures the open science gathering and research percentage of open access papers out of the total, and through purpose: this commitment will multidimensional reports on the 8 ensure that assessment approach pillars submitted annually to the decisions are evidence informed. governing bodies and published in it will help organisations reflect on zenodo. their own processes, gain the university is committed to understanding about whether continue this monitoring activity assessment practices achieve the as a basis for the assessment of desired goals and engage in the implemented policies. evolutive assessment based on new evidence as it becomes available. it will also help to ensure control and ownership of research assessment data by the research community. università degli studi di milano via festa del perdono 7 – 20122 milano 8
