lodz university of technology (tul) action plan for 2024-2028 in the context of the coara agreement 1 short introduction & general information when did tul sign the agreement? in november 2022, lodz university of technology, poland, signed the agreement on reforming research assessment. this action plan outlines the university's dedication to responsible research assessment and, more specifically, how the agreement is implemented. the general principles of research and researchers’ assessment in poland and at tul – setting the stage tul together with other 364 scientific institutions is a part of the science ecosystem in poland.1 research and development activities are conducted at 132 academic institutions (including 103 from the public sector), 77 institutes of the polish academy of sciences, 69 research institutes, 26 institutes of the łukasiewicz research network, and 60 other scientific institutions. in poland research activity is assigned to defined scientific disciplines, which undergo periodic evaluation every four years at the national level. this evaluation results in the assignment of specific categories based on a grading scale, with a+ being the highest and c being the lowest. according to the pol-on system (an integrated data system on polish science and higher education2) in 2023 (as of august 16, 2023), a total of 1,145 scientific categories in 47 disciplines were awarded during the 2022 evaluation of the quality of scientific activities. 10% of the disciplines submitted for evaluation received the highest a+ category, one-third of the disciplines were awarded category a (37%), almost half of the evaluated disciplines received category b+ (46%), 4% of disciplines received category b, and the lowest category c was awarded to 2% of disciplines. tul obtained excellent results in the latest evaluation of the quality of scientific activities in 2021: of the 12 disciplines conducted at lodz university of technology, 3 received the a+ category, 6 received category a, and 3 received category b+. when evaluating, individual achievements of employees representing a given discipline are taken into account. subsequently categories awarded to scientific disciplines determine the rights of an evaluated institution to conduct studies, doctoral schools, and grant degrees, and titles. they also affect the amount of subsidies, i.e., the financial resources that scientific units receive from the state budget. the quality of research in poland is evaluated using three main criteria: (i) scientific or artistic level of conducted research activities: this includes the assessment of scientific articles, monographs, books and chapters therein, and patents. the evaluation uses the ministerial list of journals and publishers as a reference point. (ii) financial effects of research and development activities: this is assessed based on the magnitude of financial support received from national and international funding calls. additionally, the commercialization of research results, development works, and research activities initiated by external stakeholders outside the higher education sector are considered. (iii) impact of research and innovation on societal and economic surroundings: institutions must describe the direct effects of their research on society and the economy. this involves case studies to measure and assess the impact. 2 these criteria ensure a comprehensive evaluation of research quality, considering both the academic merits and broader impacts of research activities. public universities comprise the largest group of researchers employed by polish research institutions (81%). as previously mentioned, the performance of individual researchers, which undergoes periodic assessment, is closely related to the evaluation of research quality within scientific disciplines at the institutional level. this assessment uses criteria determined by the rector after consulting with the senate, trade unions, student government, and doctoral student government. periodic appraisal is conducted through a self-evaluation questionnaire completed by the academic staff members being appraised. the final assessment is made on an individual basis by the appraisee’s immediate supervisor, who is the head of the organizational unit where the academic staff member works. although the periodic questionnaire considers teaching, research, and organizational activities based on the position of the academic employee, its nature and content closely resemble the surveys used to evaluate higher education institutions. the general rules for these surveys are established at the national level by the ministry of science and higher education. tul mission&vision&strategy the goals, the university aims to achieve, the destination it strives towards, and the way it wants to create space for work, scientific research, education, and collaboration with external stakeholders are described in the strategy of lodz university of technology.3 in 2016 tul has been awarded the hr excellence in research and since then the award has been regularly and successfully renewed.4 at the moment, the university is conducting an internal review and gap analysis. based on the outcomes, a new action plan for 2025-2028 will be prepared. what has been so far in the context of the coara agreement? in 2023 the internal coara team was set comprising researchers at various stages of their career as well as other professionals working at the university. the members of the team signed up to various working groups within the coara polish national chapter. who has prepared and accepted the document? agnieszka dybała-defratyka (director of research support center, tul) łukasz albrecht (vice-rector for science, tul) krzysztof jóźwik (rector of lodz university of technology) 3 a tentative calendar of events/actions and strategy coara agreement tul’s current status and proposed/planned schedule / commitment actions timeframe 1. recognising while tul recognizes the diversity of contributions and starting phase of the diversity of research outputs beyond journal publications within ap, 2024-2025 contributions to, the periodic assessment of scientific personnel, a and careers in, quantitative approach is still used for some of them. research in as mentioned in the introduction, tul cannot accordance with independently establish criteria for research and the needs and researchers' assessment that deviate from the nature of the national-level evaluation standards. however, polish research universities do possess significant freedom and autonomy, allowing for the proposal, testing, and potential implementation of specific criteria for periodic assessment within the university. a thorough examination of existing criteria and their impact on overall research evaluation will be conducted to identify key challenges and propose new policies, solutions, and criteria. e.g. new policies related to hiring researchers in positions not involving teaching duties. tul is also committed to further participate in the hr excellence in research programme. within this framework internal review and gap analysis will be performed to identify areas that require special attention and stimulation. based on the results new action plan for hrs4r will be developed with the aim to retain and further develop scientific excellency of lodz university of technology. 2. base research as shown in the introduction part, the quality of 2025 assessment primarily research is evaluated based on three criteria which on qualitative content directly originates from invidiual researcher’s evaluation for which contributions (publications, projects, impact). most of peer review is central, these contributions are primarly peer-reviewed supported by (publications and project proposals) and the use of responsible use of quantitative indicators is centralized. quantitative indicators nevertheless, scientific promotion in poland (earning a ph.d., habilitation, and full professorship) is fully peer- reviewed, and each institution is required to follow the same rules. 4 in the institutional periodic assessment of individual researchers, the implementation of peer-reviewed recognition has so far been limited to evaluating researchers partly based on their membership in associations, expert boards, teams, committees, and councils (as part of the organizational component of the periodic assessment). (i) one possible solution to consider in the case of a formal appeal after the appraisal is that the summary of the periodic evaluation, conducted at least once every four years, could be carried out by the panel of three people. the evaluated individuals should have the opportunity to present on one hand their professional activities in the form of a narrative cv, including all aspects of their work that they consider important and on the other, personal circumstances (e.g., caring for close family members due to medical issues). (ii) additionally, within the tul action plan for further implementing the gender equality plan, there are plans to improve the system for deferring periodic researcher evaluations due to special leave, especially parental leave. (iii) furthermore, the expansion of the periodic assessment questionnaire to include recognition of participation in conferences as invited, keynote, or plenary speakers will be considered. 3. abandon while some metrics are still in use, primarily related to 2025-2028 inappropriate uses in research evaluation regulations at the polish national research assessment of level, tul has introduced several criteria that extend journal- and beyond a narrow set of quantitative journal and publication based publication-based metrics. these criteria emphasize metrics, in particular researchers' creativity, activity, and potential (patents, inappropriate uses of projects, spin-off companies, awards, reviews). in the journal impact factor recruitment process, all aspects of candidates' (jif) and h-index experience are considered, including their industry- related work experience. in addition to the candidate's scientific or teaching potential, their creativity, social activity, and outreach efforts are also considered. during the implementation of the human resources strategy for researchers university’s otm-r policy (open, transparent and merit-based recruitment) was developed.5 5 (i) tul is going to continue activities related to the hrs4r award. one focus will be preparation and implementation of one application form for researchers’ recruitment process. (ii) another area will involve reviewing the status of researchers hired on a project basis and establishing rules for retaining the best talents within university on permanent contracts. 4. avoid the use of in most of the cases tul does not follow the - rankings of research international rankings in research assessment, in organisations in particular individual researchers’ evaluation. research assessment to ensure that the international ranking will not be misused for instance during researcher recruitment process appropriate provisions will be included in the otm-r policy. 5. commit resources to the periodic assessment criteria are ultimately 2025-2026 reforming research determined by the rector after consulting assessment as is representatives of the university community, student needed to achieve the and phd student governments, and trade unions. organisational changes additionally, tul has allocated personnel resources committed to (coara tul working team) to develop and oversee the reform. this team consists of researchers at various career stages as well as professionals with non- scientific expertise. (i) to undertake certain activities effectively, increased engagement and closer collaboration between the coara tul working team and the steering committee (sc) for hr excellence in research will be necessary. the sc, which includes the vice-rector for research, 12 chairs of scientific disciplines, the chair of the rector's committee for good academic practices, and the chair of the phd student government, makes key decisions and oversees the strategic directions of actions to be implemented within the hrs4r framework at lodz university of technology. (ii) additionally, a closer cooperation with the monitoring committee for hr excellence in research, comprising representatives from the university's units involved in implementing the principles of the charter and code, will be established. further cooperation with the national chapter and other bodies at the national level could also be beneficial. 6 6. review and develop periodic questionnaire and all bodies involved in its 2025-2028 research assessment preparation&modification: criteria, tools and periodic appraisal is carried out by means of a processes questionnaire for the periodic evaluation of academic staff by appraised persons themselves. it is then concluded on a one-person basis, by an appraisee’s immediate supervisor, who is the head of the organizational unit that is the place of work of the academic staff member. although the periodic questionnaire takes into account both teaching, research, and organizational activities depending on the position of the academic teacher, its nature and content are very similar to surveys used to evaluate he institutions, which are established at the national level by the ministry of science and higher education. (i) to some extent dependent on legislative changes regarding the evaluations of he units at the ministerial level, tul will strive to incorporate adjustments in internal evaluations concerning individual research and researchers. this will enable us, on one hand, to reflect the university's status, and on the other hand, to ensure a fair, transparent, and responsible assessment of individuals. (ii) this also involves the work of the coara team, whose main tasks will include developing recommendations for other university teams/units engaged in implementing those principles for the evaluation of researchers. (iii) one way to test new solutions might rely on conducting a pilot program in a selected unit and implementing: (i) alternative criteria or (ii) an alternative form of assessment. 7. raise awareness of tul undertakes strategic actions aiming to create an 2025-2026 research assessment attractive working environment for the academic staff reform and provide of lodz university of technology, which is an element transparent of the university's mission, realized through communication, conducting scientific research, as well as the education guidance, and training and development of academic staff, in accordance on assessment criteria with the principles of academic freedom and respect and processes as for academic values. well as their use tul ensures that its researchers have appropriate conditions for creating, transferring, exchanging, and 7 disseminating knowledge, as well as fostering the development of their scientific careers. building strong research teams and conducting research at the highest possible level, based on existing global standards, is one of the key tasks that define the strategic direction of the university's development. therefore, the hrs4r tul action plan for 2022-2024 focused on four areas defined in the european charter for researchers: ethical and professional aspects, recruitment, working conditions, and training. (i) in this respect trainings for decision makers, recruitment committees, researchers are planned. additionally, tul will continue training to strengthen research potential of academic staff via raising motivation for continuous professional development by introducing specific recognition system e.g. within the periodic appraisal. part of it will be devoted to enhancing cooperation with the societal and industrial stakeholders and the university strategic partners like for instance european consortium of innovative universities, https://www.eciu.eu/). (ii) tul is committed to establish a laboratory for citizen science combining researchers from different scientific fields and at various career stages as well as supportive staff members to ensure that research and innovation in tul is inclusive and responsible, benefit societal challenges and at the same time its evaluation includes its various outputs and impacts. 8. exchange practices some discussions at the national level take place 2024-2028 and experiences to within various committees, such as krput and enable mutual learning conferences for vps for research. within and beyond the coalition (i) tul is going to expand the exchange of practices internationally via discussions within the university alliance tul is the member of (european consortium of innovative universites, https://www.eciu.eu/ and its internal groups dedicated to research and innovation such as eciu (r&i expert group, vps for research). (ii) at the national level tul is going to strengthen the engagement in the national chapter and respective working groups. 8 9. communicate the working version of action plan will be shared on 2024-2028 progress made on the zenodo platform, annually updated also on the adherence to the university website. members of the coara tul principles and working team will continue their engagement in the pl implementation national chapter working groups. of the commitments 10. evaluate practices, tul plans to regularly monitor and (re)evaluate its 2025-2028 criteria and tools assessment criteria, tools, and processes. once a year based on solid feedback coming from appraising panels as well as evidence and the employees in managerial positions will be collected state-of the-art in and analyzed. the tul coara team will be also research on research, involved in those activities. 1 nauka w polsce 2023, opi, mein 2 https://polon.nauka.gov.pl/en/ 3 https://p.lodz.pl/en/about-tul/tul-strategy 4 https://p.lodz.pl/en/employees/hr-excellence-research-lodz-university-technology 5 https://p.lodz.pl/en/employees/implementation-hr-excellence-research-tul/otm-r-policy 9
