action plan for the reform of research evaluation at the universitat de girona (udg) within the framework of the coalition for the advancement of research evaluation (coara) content 1. introduction and institutional context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2. general objectives of the plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3. coara priority commitments adopted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 4. specific actions (2025–2027) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 5. monitoring and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 6. conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 action plan for the reform of research evaluation at the universitat de girona © 2025 by universitat de girona is licensed under cc by 4.0. to view a copy of this license, visit https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 2 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg 1. introduction and institutional context the universitat de girona (udg) is a public institution committed to the generation and transfer of knowledge, social responsibility and sustainability. within this framework, the udg accepts the challenge of transforming research evaluation systems, in line with the prin- ciples of the coalition for the advancement of research evaluation (coara) and with initiatives such as dora, hrs4r and open science. this commitment is based on a set of already consolidated institutional policies, such as: • the organisation of research at the udg (bou 7100), which establishes the criteria for the promotion, recognition and support of research. • the udg’s environmental plan, which promotes sustainable research aligned with the sustainable development goals (sdgs). • the gender equality plan and the anti-harassment protocol, which guarantee a safe, inclusive and equitable research environment. • ethical, child protection and data protection procedures that ensure in- tegrity and accountability in research. • the open access mandate of the universitat de girona to promote the dissemination of scientific and academic production in open access. • adherence to the european charter for researchers and obtaining the hr excellence in research award, which recognises the udg’s efforts to offer an attractive and quality research environment. this action plan is therefore part of a solid and coherent institutional trajec- tory, which seeks to consolidate a culture of evaluation that is fairer, plural and oriented towards the common good. 3 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg 2. general objectives of the plan the objectives of this action plan respond to the udg’s desire to place qual- ity, responsibility and diversity at the centre of research evaluation. specif- ically, it proposes to: • promote an evaluation based on the intrinsic value of scientific work, taking into account its relevance, rigour, social impact and contribution to open knowledge. • strengthen the culture of open science, recognising open access publi- cation, fair data sharing, software development and participation in collaborative initiatives. • value the diversity of trajectories and contributions, including teaching, transfer, innovation, management, citizen participation and the gender dimension in research. • promote responsible research through the application of ethical proto- cols, data protection, the inclusion of the gender perspective and envi- ronmental sustainability. • guarantee equal opportunities and non-discrimination in evaluation processes, promoting transparency and the training of evaluation com- mittees. 3. coara priority commitments adopted the universitat de girona assumes the priority commitments of coara as a reference framework for research evaluation reform. these commitments are: a. recognise the diversity of research practices and results, including pub- lications, data, software, technical reports, outreach, transfer and leader- ship activities. b. base the evaluation on qualitative criteria, such as scientific relevance, social impact, methodological coherence and adequacy to the values ​​of responsible research. 4 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg c. use quantitative indicators responsibly, avoiding the exclusive use of metrics such as the journal impact factor (if) or the h-index, and pro- moting contextualised and transparent indicators. d. promote transparency, inclusiveness and participation in evaluation processes, ensuring the representation of different profiles and the train- ing of committee members. e. promote the training and professional development of research staff and evaluators, with special attention to research ethics, open science, citi- zen science, collaborative research and the gender perspective. 4. specific actions (2025–2027) this plan is based on actions already initiated by the universitat de girona as part of its commitment to the reform of research evaluation. these ac- tions include: • formal membership of coara, with the signing of the institutional agreement (2023). • active participation in the spanish division of coara, including face-to- face meetings in barcelona. • specific training for responsible evaluation, such as organised sessions on six-year plans and alternative indicators. • participation in external forums. • dissemination of resources and good practices through the website. • creation of the open science commission, as an institutional body to promote policies aligned with coara. • implementation of the programme for the retention and recruitment of excellent research talent, which incorporates quality criteria beyond tra- ditional metrics. • ongoing actions: - inclusion of responsible evaluation criteria in teaching and research staff recruitment. - specific training from the doctoral school. these actions will be complemented by the following initiatives planned for the period 2025–2027: 5 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg responsible action description calendar indicators person(s) a1 review the teaching and research vice-rectorate for 2025 new criteria staff evaluation criteria in internal research published and calls (grants, promotion, six-year applied vice-rectorate for terms) to include responsible personnel metrics and qualitative criteria. human resources service a2 create an institutional guide for bibec, research 2025 guide published the responsible evaluation of committee and disseminated research, with examples and good practices. a3 training for evaluation doctoral school, 2025–2026 number of committees and teaching and sessions and vice-rector for research staff, and research participants personnel support staff on coara, dora human resources and open science. service a4 explicit recognition of fair data, vice-rectorate for 2026 updated calls software and other results in research internal calls. a5 active participation in national institutional 2025–2027 number of and international networks on representatives participations and evaluation reform. collaborations 5. monitoring and evaluation the open science commission will oversee the implementation of the plan. an annual review of progress will be conducted, and monitoring will be dis- seminated. 6 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg 6. conclusions this action plan represents a firm step towards a culture of evaluation that ​​ open science and is fairer, more inclusive and aligned with the values of responsible research. the universitat de girona thus reaffirms its com- mitment to quality research, with social impact and oriented towards the common good. the implementation of this plan not only responds to international de- mand, but also reinforces the udg’s own identity as a university rooted in its territory, committed to sustainability, equality and innovation. through this process, the udg aspires to become a benchmark in the transformative evaluation of research, at the service of society and shared knowledge. references [1] aprovació de les mesures d’ordenació de la recerca, de la transferència i l’intercanvi de coneixement, i de la innovació de la universitat de girona. (2024). ebou (n.o 3668). universitat de girona. http://seu.udg.edu/ca-es/ publicacions-oficials/boudg/ebou/disposicio/3668 [2] ciència oberta - guia investigador. (2025). universitat de girona. https://guia-investigador.udg.edu/recerca-i-innovacio-responsable/ciencia- oberta-2/ [3] hrs4r - excellence in research. (2018). investiga. universitat de girona. https://www.udg.edu/ca/investiga/hrs4r-excellence-in-research [4] codi de bones pràctiques en recerca, transferència i intercanvi de coneixement i innovació de la universitat de girona = código de buenas prácticas en investigación, transferencia e intercambio de conocimiento e innovación de la universitat de girona = code of good practice in research, transfer and exchange of knowledge and innovation at the universitat de girona. (2024). universitat de girona. http://hdl.handle.net/10256/25675 [5] mandat institucional d’accés obert de la universitat de girona = mandato institucional de acceso abierto de la universidad de girona = institutional open access mandate of the universitat de girona. (2021). universitat de girona. http://hdl.handle.net/10256/19578 7 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg [6] codi ètic de la universitat de girona (udg) = código ético de la universidad de girona (udg) = code of ethics of the universitat de girona (udg). (2023). universitat de girona. http://hdl.handle.net/10256/25865 [7] procediment per revisió ètica segons l’àmbit de recerca - guia investigador. guia investigador - guia investigador. (2022). universitat de girona. https://guia-investigador.udg.edu/recerca-i-innovacio-responsable/ procediment-per-revisio-etica-segons-lambit-de-recerca/ [8] pla d’ambientalització de la universitat de girona. (2021). en compromís social. sostenibilitat. universitat de girona. https://www.udg.edu/ca/portals/50/s%20ostenibilitat/pla%20 ambientalitzaci%c3%93/pla%20ambientalitzacio_ca.pdf [9] pla d’igualtat de la udg. segon pla d’igualtat de la udg. (2021). universitat de girona. https://www.udg.edu/ca/compromis-social/arees/ igualtat-de-genere/el-pla-digualtat [10] protocol de la universitat de girona per a la prevenció, protecció, atenció i reparació de les situacions de violència masclista, assetjament sexual i qualsevol altra forma de violència o assetjament per raó de sexe, orientació sexual, identitat de gènere o expressió de gènere. (2024). universitat de girona. https://www.udg.edu/ca/compromis-social/arees/ igualtat-de-genere/el-protocol-contra-lassetjament [11] dimensió de gènere als projectes de recerca - guia investigador. (2022). universitat de girona. https://guia-investigador.udg.edu/recerca-i- innovacio-responsable/dimensio-de-genere-als-projectes-de-recerca/ [12] protocol per a la protecció de la infància a la udg = protocolo para la protección a la infancia en la udg = universitat de girona child protection policy. (2020). universitat de girona. http://hdl.handle.net/10256/26700 [13] protecció de dades de caràcter personal - guia investigador. (2024). universitat de girona. https://guia-investigador.udg.edu/recerca-i- innovacio-responsable/proteccio-de-dades-de-caracter-personal/ 8 action plan for the reform of research evaluation udg universitat de girona edition: september, 2025
