action plan uab-coara (coalition for advancement of research assessment) 2024-27 introduction in a constantly evolving scientific context, research evaluation has become a key element in ensuring the quality and relevance of generated knowledge. in this regard, the european union (eu) has taken a proactive approach to transforming evaluation systems, with the goal of promoting transparency, diversity, and excellence in scientific production. this initiative aligns with the fundamental principles guiding european research and innovation policies. one of the essential pillars of this paradigm shift is the european initiative coara (coalition for advancing research assessment, www.coara.eu ), driven by science europa and the european universities association (eua) with support from the european commission. coara brings together many organizations (730 as of may 2024) involved in research processes and/or evaluation. during the early months of 2022, a participatory process led to an agreement containing 10 common principles and commitments to drive systemic research evaluation reform. the agreement was published in july 2022 (https://coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-full-text/ ), and by november 2022, uab had joined. signatory organizations include aqu, aneca, crue, csic, cerca, and over thirty spanish universities. the key point of the agreement is that research evaluation systems for researchers and research organizations recognize diverse outcomes, practices, and activities that maximize research quality and impact. this requires introducing qualitative aspects into evaluation, with peer review as a central component, always supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators. in fact, the scientific community itself has persistently questioned the current research evaluation system due to its limitations, biases, and reliance on metrics. to advance toward a new evaluation system, the agreement outlines principles, commitments, and timelines for reforms, establishing the foundation for a coalition of organizations willing to work together on implementation. these coalitions create communities of practice for sharing experiences and learning. with coalition support, organizations will decide on steps to implement commitments and the pace of their reform process, considering their national context, disciplinary focus, research structures, strategic objectives, and organizational mission. at uab, a working group has been established under the vice-rectorate for research and the office of institutional projects, including technical staff and academic representatives from various fields of knowledge (https://www.uab.cat/en/open- science/coara ). this working group has several objectives: • generate a space for debate and reflection on methodologies and indicators for evaluating academic careers and the social impact of research. • align uab's institutional strategy with european policies promoted by coara. • actively participate in coara activities, including working groups such as the spanish national chapter. • specifically, within the framework of coara's european initiative, develop an action plan for implementing coara principles." action plan uab-coara (2024-2027) objectives • analyse our current institutional practices in research and evaluation of researchers. • based on the previous analysis, identify possible areas for improvement and obstacles to address. • at the institutional level, develop, pilot, and implement alternative evaluation practices to replace or complement the existing ones. • engage the uab community in this process. coara commitments main lines of action current status actions 2024-2027 responsible monitoring method 1.recognise the diversity of institutional declaration in line with coara the institutional contributions to, and careers institutional uab signs the commitments. (fall 2024). declaration will be • institutional in, research in accordance with commitments coara agreement the declaration will include the internal developed by the vice- declaration the needs and nature of the (nov 2022) organization that will make possible to rector of research and signed and research. advance in the reform of research assessment. the institutional projects published. office and approved by 2.base research assessment the committee of primarily on qualitative research and the evaluation for which peer governing council review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators. 3., (as proxies for quality and impact). ‘inappropriate uses’ include: • relying exclusively on author-based metrics (e.g. counting papers, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact. 4. . 6.review and develop analise, identify and test • periodic research assessment criteria, uab institutional 1)mapping of the different uab calls, tools, vice-rector of research meetings tools and processes. practices susceptible to and mechanisms currently implementing. institutional projects • number of be improve meeting not initiated office focus groups 10.evaluate practices, criteria coara commitments. 2) co-creation sessions with uab community • number of and tools based on solid to explore and suggest new ways for research task force: research researchers evidence and the state-of the- assessment. the focus groups will include r1- management unit, involved in the art in research on research, r4 and diversity of disciplines. also gender research valorisation process. and make data openly balance and diversity will be considered. it will unit, international • number of available for evidence also include technical staff closely related to projects office, libraries technical staff gathering and research the research evaluation assessment. service involved in the process. 3) pilot phase: having into account the • open report on previous exploratory tasks 1 and 2, potential pilot results changes will be tested and assessed. 7.raise awareness of research actions related to communication communication strategy vice-rector of research • number of new assessment reform and creating coara strategy 1) surveys to be launched within the 3 institutional projects trainings provide transparent awareness and years for multiple purposes linked to office related to the communication, guidance, developing tools to session: new coara action plan. reform of and training on assessment support and guide uab practices in the 2) awareness raising sessions about task force: uab doctoral research criteria and processes as well community in the research coara at university level. school and continuous assessment. as their use transition to the reform assessment 3) coara website development education unit • people trained of research assessment. training provide new training to support research training currently community (both for evaluation and in place: : application) in the transition to the reform of citizen science research assessment (such as narrative rri training; social impact; open science) support for narrative cv 5.commit resources to actions focus to ensure uab coara • coara action plan implementation vice-rector of research + biannual meeting and reforming research the proper development working group team institutional projects annual meetings assessment as is needed to and implementation of and action plan • task force for internal evaluation of office open annual follow-up achieve the organizational the uab coara action task force in place the research assessment report changes committed to plan. • task force for communication • task force for training 8. exchange practices and uab contribution for the coara working participation of uab members in coara annual open report on experiences to enable mutual exchange of practices groups already in working groups at european level: coara working groups. learning within and beyond and experiences to place and • teresa sorder- coara working group the coalition enable mutual learning contributing. on social impact exchange practices (nr.) at regional, national and • josé luís molina- coara working and experience at international level. group early-and-mid-career european level researchers (emcrs) • eva isabel nueno - coara working number of exchanges group multilingualism and language and practices at regional biases in research assessment and national level. participation of uab within european alliances • eciu participation of uab at regional networks • agaur • acup • aqu • aneca annual report 9. communicate progress progress not initiated elaboration of the annual report made on adherence to the principles and implementation of the commitments governance and monitoring of the action plan the actions of the uab-coara 2024-2027 action plan are framed institutionally within the scope of the vice-rectorate for research. the action plan has been developed by a working group derived from the uab-coara committee, which was composed of researchers from different areas of knowledge, and technical staff involved in research management. the working group will meet every six months to assess the implementation and update of the ap. the action plan will be: • shared and discussed with the team members working on the research assessment advancement plan. • open for consultation with the uab community. • submitted for approval by the research, innovation, and knowledge transfer committee. • submitted for approval by the governing council.
