technological university dublin coara action plan 1. introduction technological university dublin (tu dublin) is ireland’s first technological university. it was established in january 2019 when our founding institutes of technology (dublin institute of technology, institute of technology blanchardstown, and the institute of technology tallaght) joined together to seek designation as a technological university.1 it is a new and inspiring university where the arts, sciences, business, engineering, and technology converge, and it offers education and training programmes from apprenticeship to doctoral degree. tu dublin is a place where fundamental research and new theoretical concepts are nurtured and supported so the findings can translate into novel technologies, practices, and policies for the benefit of learning, society, business, and industry. our approach is to continually adapt and expand our activities to reflect an evolving society and the wider environment, and we see the initiatives below as key to our success in that regard: • we have ambitious targets centred around people, planet and partnership as set out in our strategic intent 2030 and all our activities are underpinned by the un sustainable development goals. • by signing the magna charta universitatum in november 2022 we demonstrated our commitment to being responsive, responsible, and reliable partners for serving society, businesses, and other stakeholders; and to be proactive participants in addressing global and societal challenges. • tu dublin led out a transformational initiative where ireland’s five technological universities (tus) established tu-net to advance excellence in open research. launched in april 2023, tu-net has published a joint statement on open research, and has developed a shared open access repository, making our research visible nationally and globally. • we signed up to the coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) in april 2023, committing to developing an action plan for implementation of the 10 coara principles with a further commitment to share this plan publicly. • the tu act sets ambitious 10-year targets to boost research activity and capability. tu dublin recently published its first research & innovation strategy 2023-28 outlining its plans to increase the volume and impact of research and innovation and move toward achieving these targets. 1 https://hea.ie/policy/he-reform/technological-universities/ 1 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 2. evolution of the university system in ireland before the 1970s, irish higher education was dominated by five universities with roots dating back to the 19th century or earlier. as ireland’s economy shifted in the 1970s from agriculture to an enterprise model driven by foreign investment, the demand for technically skilled workers led to the establishment of national institutes of education and regional technical colleges. the ict boom of the 1980s and the rise of the “information society” saw these institutes evolve into universities. by 2000, regional technical colleges were renamed institutes of technology, reflecting their role in developing new programs in high-demand skill areas, often in partnership with industry, and research that benefited the nation’s enterprises and regions. a 2004 oecd review of higher education in ireland spurred further transformation. the publication of impact 2030: ireland’s research and innovation strategy recognized the review’s findings and established ireland’s goal to create a more diverse higher education system focused on collaboration, upskilling, and widening access. the technological universities act (2018) – through the merging of the iots into larger institutions - marked a significant step in this direction by enabling the creation of technological universities as a new feature of ireland’s higher education landscape. while still in their infancy, technological universities (tus) aim to enhance the quality and impact of higher education, particularly in the regions they serve. they focus on developing vocational and professional programs that support economic development, increasing research capacity in applied areas, and providing a more diverse, flexible education system aligned with ireland’s evolving economic needs. tus have a distinct pedagogical and research focus, emphasising a practice-based approach. 3. the research environment in tu dublin tu dublin, through its founding institutions, has a proud heritage of generating important scientific insights, prototyping, and launching novel technologies and companies, influencing policy, and reflecting on and contributing to the creative life of ireland. whilst research and innovation activity grew organically over this period, it accelerated significantly in the early 2000s, with the first large scale investments in research infrastructure through the programme for research in third level institutions (prtli). prtli allowed the tu dublin founding institutions develop dedicated research infrastructure, facilitating the creation of research institutes. these have now transformed into significant infrastructural platforms, or ‘research hubs.’ tu dublin research hubs bring together researchers within broadly complementary fields of activity, encouraging, and actively supporting collaboration between individual researchers and between research centres and groups located in the academic schools, with the goal of building critical mass in distinctive fields of enquiry. 2 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 tu dublin has leveraged research investments to great effect — our community now comprises 1,000+ researchers and innovators. this community is engaged in the generation of excellent and impactful research outputs and outcomes, which help ensure that the university plays a vital role in ireland’s economic, civic, and cultural evolution, whilst also making a significant contribution to international knowledge and enhancing dublin’s role as ireland’s global gateway. in our pursuit of excellence in the conduct of our research and innovation activity we have adopted the following principles: freedom of influence on excellence exploration education provision knowledge transfer engagement & openness & impact commercialisation good research inclusivity practice the university, through the support of its research and innovation services, supports its researchers and innovators in planning and delivering on research projects, knowledge transfer, and public engagement initiatives. it has put in place structures to enhance the visibility and reach of our outputs, such as publications and intellectual property, and to effectively communicate research findings to different audiences, by making them openly available. tu dublin is an ‘open first’ university and was the first university in ireland to have an open access digital repository, arrow, and the first irish university to establish a dedicated open research support unit whose objective is to make the intellectual output of the university free to access on a global platform. 3 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 4. advancing research assessment as a new form of university in ireland, the tu sector does not yet have a formal research assessment system in place. research performance is measured by the higher education authority on an annual basis. evaluation of the quality of research currently takes place as part of an overall institutional review process undertaken by qqi every 7 years, with the first iteration for the university taking place in 2021 (cinnte review). carefully designed research assessment practices are key to making fair decisions on the quality and potential impact of research findings, for building strategic partnerships and collaborations and aiding career progression. given our commitment to the 10 coara principles, we support the establishment of research assessment practices that are based on qualitative peer review, supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators when appropriate. by joining coara, tu dublin has formalised its commitment to developing a research assessment framework to recognise the diverse outputs, practices and activities that maximise the quality and impact of our research. 5. approach to implementing coara as signatories of the coara agreement, we agree on the need for an inclusive and responsible practice of research assessment to validate the quality of our research. it will establish a common direction for research reform practices within the university. we will work together with other higher education institutions through the irish national coara chapter, to enable a systemic framework based on the 10 coara principles. we recognise that additional resources will be essential as we move to a formal assessment process and the ultimate success of the implementation of the plan will be determined by the availability of such resources. in the first instance, we need to reflect on how and what we wish to assess and then build a research assessment framework and validate it. we will establish a working group dedicated to developing a responsible research assessment framework and implementation plan. to develop greater literacy and competencies in responsible research assessment across the university, training and development will be incorporated into the responsible research assessment framework. the framework will include designing assessment criteria and processes that emphasise quality, impact, diversity, inclusiveness, and collaboration. 4 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 5.1. completed actions post-coara agreement several actions have been delivered within the first 12 months since signing up to the agreement: • publication of the tu dublin research & innovation strategy 2023-28 defining five key thematic priorities where we currently have international recognition in carrying out high quality and impactful research. • establishment of the research and innovation awards recognising the achievements of our researchers and innovators. • establishment of research hubs within the research and innovation services to lead the definition, establishment and promotion of a collaborative, supportive and stimulating research culture that actively promotes and supports cross-disciplinary collaboration. • call to establish designated research centres in tu dublin launched may 2024, with inbuilt assessment and review processes. • hrs4r accreditation with an accompanying action plan to improve our researcher hr processes. • deployment of a new research information management system, pure, enabling improved tracking of a broad range of activities across the institution. • establishment of an open research support unit within the research support services, a collaborative unit with library services, supporting the ‘open first’ ambitions of the university, • establishment of the research career development team integrated into the people development service, with a working group made up of personnel from r&i and library services to augment supports for early career researchers and new staff. • establishment of the research engagement & impact team within the research and innovation services to lead out on the development of engagement and impact frameworks, support engaged research and develop a research assessment framework. • expansion of the library research services, including a head of research services, data librarian, open scholarship librarian, research indicators librarian and research support librarian. • development of (open) research training and advisory services to support a diverse range of activities, e.g, research data management – data management planning and data publishing, narrative cv writing, open access publishing and predatory publishing, introduction to open research, gdpr in an open research environment, responsible use of ai in research, search strategy and literature review. 5 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 5.2 technological university dublin action plan considering the intricate operational landscape outlined previously, along with the various contingencies and stakeholders, encompassing both institutional and national entities, tu dublin has crafted its action plan as a network of interconnected strands, rather than a straightforward linear progression. acknowledging the differing levels of complexity among actions, we embrace this multi-stranded approach to sustain progress across various fronts, avoiding excessive reliance on a strictly linear timeline. the five strands are as follows: establish experiment implement revise monitor 6 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 1. establish this standalone phase of our coara action plan provides for the establishment of the structures and supports necessary for delivering on our commitments under the agreement. action description responsible indicative timeline establish a responsible research chaired by the head of research engagement & impact, this r&i academy,2 head of r&i september 2024 assessment working (rra) group working group will comprise of diverse representatives from engagement & impact across the organisation and will aim to determine our internal philosophy as a university as we set about implementing the coara principles and to develop a responsible research assessment framework over the three years of the action plan document our current state develop a landscape analysis of current activities in tu rra working group december 2024 dublin as they relate to research assessment and our commitments under coara review this action plan & deliver review and revise this initial action plan based on the rra working group, head q2 2025 version 2 completed landscape analysis of r&i engagement & impact work with other technological work with our tu partners to develop a common approach vp r&i, head of research, from q2 2025 universities to guide the delivery to creating a responsible research assessment framework open research support of a tu-wide research for our sector unit assessment system 2 the tu dublin r&i academy is a 30 member university body drawn from the university research community, which is chaired by the vice president for research and innovation. it is responsible for translating the institutional vision and strategy into a university research and innovation strategy, and for guiding the implementation of this strategy. 7 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 engagement with the irish retain a designated nominee on the coara national chapter vp r&i, open research ongoing national coara chapter and ensure alignment with national approach support unit consider publishing an inorms develop and publish a statement of intent regarding vp r&i, r&i academy december 2025 more than our ranking assessment beyond ranking criteria statement 2. implement this phase will run across the full three years of the action plan, developing and implementing the supports needed to deliver on our commitments under coara. while the detailed actions of this strand will be further developed in version 2 of this action plan, the following actions are envisaged. action description responsible indicative timeline publish a responsible research over the lifetime of the action plan, develop and publish a vp r&i, head of r&i q3 2025 assessment framework co-designed and endorsed rra framework with a plan for engagement & impact implementation develop coara aligned develop accreditation criteria for research centres which are vp r&i, head of r&i july 2026 accreditation structures for transparent, and issue a call for accreditation engagement & impact research centres publish a new iteration of our co-create and publish a framework for ecr development vp r&i, r&i academy and july 2027 early career researcher aligned with the responsible research assessment framework people development3 development framework and coara principles establish data stewardship develop a business case and apply for university funding to open research support december 2024 services the recruit a data stewardship coordinator to review and unit oversee development of services, including conducting a 3 as part of the human resources function, the people development team assist in the development of knowledge, skills and behaviours of all tu dublin staff. 8 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 landscape and gap analysis of current skills and infrastructures publish an open research review and formalise open research practices in tu dublin open research support q2 2026 framework through the publication of an or framework unit expansion of researcher training review, develop and expand researcher training programmes people development, r&i, ongoing programmes in line with our coara commitments library services 3. monitor the ‘monitor’ phase of our action plan will work across two phases. we will develop structures to effectively monitor the breadth and diversity of our research outputs, enabling assessment across a broad range of criteria, while also looking outwards to the broader coara community for guidance and to ensure ongoing alignment. action description responsible indicative timeline implement data management implement argos, an eosc-compliant, open source dmp open research support june 2025 planning software, argos planning system across the university, linking to other unit & library services systems and providing oversight of data outputs across the university. further linking this system to the noam and pure systems. active engagement with the establish a data quality pathway to ensure the quality and open research support ongoing national open access monitor transparency of tu dublin data in the national open access unit & library services monitor development of pure maintain, develop and expand of pure across the r&i r&i common services unit ongoing landscape at tu dublin, presenting a ‘farm to fork’ solution to research-related data, enabling transparency and fair assessment of a variety of skills, tasks and outputs 9 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 development & implementation develop a timeline and procedure for reviewing the vp r&i, head of research q1 2026 of action plan review path commitments and actions in this action plan to monitor engagement and impact, ongoing developments r&i academy engagement with the irish retain a designated nominee on the coara national chapter vp r&i, open research ongoing national coara chapter and monitor approaches across all irish signatories, using support unit this avenue too for engagement at an international level 4. revise aligning closely with the ‘monitor’ phase of our action plan, tu dublin commits to reviewing and iterating over the 3-year lifecycle of the action plan, based on feedback institutionally, and national engagement. action description responsible indicative timeline development a robust feedback aligning with the commitment to develop a research vp r&i, head of research q2 2026 mechanism for our research assessment framework, a feedback mechanism for revision engagement and impact, community in relation to research of the framework will be developed r&i academy assessment development and develop a timeline and procedure for reviewing the vp r&i, r&i academy, december 2026 implementation of action plan commitments and actions in this action plan to monitor review path ongoing developments and make revisions as appropriate engagement with the irish seek insight and review from colleagues in other universities vp r&i, open research ongoing national coara chapter on our activities over the three years of the action plan support unit 10 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024 5. experiment as an institution we commit to trying new things and being open to change, to innovation and to opportunity. linking to our ‘monitor’ and ‘revise’ strands, we will review, adjust, and restructure our work under our commitments as needed. action description responsible indicative timeline pilot new ways of showcasing our investigate how we can better showcase the diversity of our open research support start q4 2024 - research activities research activities, e.g. case studies, open educational unit, research impact ongoing resources, pilot on showcasing fine art materials on arrow lead, library services apply for funding from coara prepare and submit an application for the second call for open research support from dec. 2024 boost cascade calls coara boost cascade funding to strengthen our coara unit, research impact lead operational capacity experiment with the capacity and experiment with the capacity and capabilities of systems r&i common services unit, ongoing capabilities of our systems such as argos and pure for recording and reporting open research support research activities, e.g. through api integrations, unit customisations evaluate resource expansion recognising that our commitments under coara wll require vpri, open research q1 2026 options and lobby for funding a new approach in how we support our researchers, we will support unit submit a request for funding to recruit additional staff to sustain our coara efforts within the university investigate inclusion in the new investigate how rankings such as open leiden may be use to open research support q3 2025 open leiden ranking better support and highlight the breadth of our research unit activities 11 tu dublin coara action plan v2 2024
