reforming research assessment ghent university’s commitment to implement the european agreement on reforming research assessment – action plan 2023-2027 1. context ghent university is actively promoting an evaluation culture that prioritises the quality and impact of research, values diversity among researchers as well as in research, and advocates for good and responsible research practices. as part of its dedication to supporting and implementing responsible research evaluation principles, ghent university formally endorsed the european agreement on reforming research assessment in 2022. in its effort to fulfill the commitments outlined in this agreement, ghent university has developed an action plan to guide its forthcoming activities in the domain of research assessment. the actions (chapter 2) are founded on a gap analysis (chapter 3) and target the university’s most urgent issues related to responsible research assessment. ghent university’s executive board approved the action plan on june 9th, 2023. 2. overview of actions action deadline 1 the call/evaluation documents are tailored, for each call/evaluation, to (a) the specific content and objectives of the call/evaluation, (b) ghent 31/12/2027 university’s vision on the responsible use of quantitative indicators, and (c) ghent university’s vision on research evaluation. the aim is to enhance transparency and alleviate the workload for both evaluated researchers and evaluators. 2 guidelines for evaluators are customised for each call/evaluation, taking into account (a) the specific content and objectives of the call/evaluation, 31/12/2027 (b) ghent university’s vision on the responsible use of quantitative indicators and (c) ghent university’s vision on research evaluation. 3 the guide for the use of quantitative indicators from 2017 undergoes an update and is transformed into a guideline for the responsible use of 31/12/2023 quantitative indicators, which is then broadly communicated. 4 in collaboration with researchers, a future evaluation framework for the university’s interdisciplinary research consortia aimed at realising societal 31/12/2024 impact is developed. emphasis is placed on creating criteria for evaluating societal impact and interdisciplinarity. 5 existing best practices in evaluating research groups, departments and faculties are compiled and made available to entities interested in 31/12/2027 (voluntarily) assessing their research activities. 6 ghent university’s communication channels (especially the website) are used to transparently inform the research community about (a) ghent 31/12/2027 university’s research evaluation policy and (b) its further implementation. 7 the needs for training, information provision, etc. regarding research evaluation (in the context of ghent university) are identified and analysed. 31/12/2026 8 if appropriate, a pilot training or information session is organised based on the outcomes of action 7. 31/12/2027 9 ghent university is an active member of the coalition for the advancement of research assessment (coara). outside coara, no initiatives for 31/12/2027 knowledge building and sharing are initiated. 10 progress reports detailing the implementation of ghent university’s vision on research assessment and the principles outlined in the agreement on 31/06/2027 reforming research assessment are submitted to the university’s research council and the board of governors. 11 ghent university’s data on the evaluation of research(ers) are made accessible (as far as possible) to (external) researchers for research purposes. 31/12/2027 ghent university refrains from initiating research-on-research activities, except in cases of individual initiatives by ghent university researchers or research groups. this work is licensed under cc by 4.0 1 3. annex. gap analysis commitment in the agreement on reforming research assessment state of play at ghent university in march 2023 objectives and actions 2023-2027 1 , research in accordance with - embedded in the university’s research evaluation policy | ghent university is already substantially meeting this commitment. no additional the needs and nature of the research https://www.ugent.be/en/ghentuniv/mission/research- actions will be developed in this regard in the period 2023-2027. policy/overview.htm#responsibleassessmentandevaluation - implemented in the career model and evaluation policy for professors (2018) and the recruitment policy for professors (2022-2023) | https://www.ugent.be/en/work/mobility-career/career-aspects/professorial-staff - implemented in the evaluation procedures organised by the research council | https://www.ugent.be/en/research/funding/bof - integrated in the career frameworks for scientific staff, business developers, co- ordinators of the interdisciplinary research consortia aimed at realising societal impact, etc. - additional activities and policies to support researchers in their different roles (e.g., leadership training), to support responsible research culture (e.g., policy on scholarly publishing, authorship,…) 2 for which peer - embedded in the university’s research evaluation policy objective: make efficient use of peer review, including reducing the workload for peer review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators peer review: reviewers and evaluators - implemented in the career model and evaluation policy for professors (2018) and the (action 1a) align candidate submission forms with specific calls/evaluations, among recruitment policy for professors (2022-2023), evaluation procedures organised by the other things, to avoid requesting and evaluating unnecessary information research council, phd examinations, etc. deadline 31/12/2027 (action 2a) taylor guidelines for evaluators to specific calls/evaluations deadline 31/12/2027 responsible use of quantitative indictors objective: make responsible use of quantitative indicators – see commitment 3 -existing guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors in the evaluation of research (2017) – see commitment 3 3 abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal- and publication- - embedded in the university’s research evaluation policy objective: make responsible use of quantitative indicators based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and - existing guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors in the evaluation of research (action 3) update the 2017 guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors h-index (as proxies for quality and impact) (2017) deadline 31/12/2023 ‘inappropriate uses’ include: - signatory of san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) (2020) • relying exclusively on author-based metrics (e.g. counting papers, patents, citations, - implemented in recruitment procedures, evaluations organised by the research objective: implement the updated guidelines grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; council, etc. (action 1b) integrate the principles of responsible use of quantitative indicators into • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, format or language; the job and grant application forms • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact. deadline 31/12/2027 (action 2b) integrate the principles of responsible use of quantitative indicators into the guidelines for evaluators deadline 31/12/2027 4 - ghent university already adopts a critical stance towards rankings ghent university is already substantially meeting this commitment. no additional - rankings are not used in research(er) assessment actions will be developed in this regard in the period 2023-2027. 5 as is needed to achieve the - researchers are involved in the reform process, in particular as members of the hr ghent university is already substantially meeting this commitment. no additional organisational changes committed to committees for professors, as evaluators in selection panels, as members of the actions will be developed in this regard in the period 2023-2027. research council, etc. - expertise is already available inside the university’s administrative units, in particular the department of personnel and organisation, the research department and the department of educational policy 6 - official representatives of researchers are actively involved in the development and objective: develop criteria for the evaluation of societal impact and interdisciplinarity criteria for units and institutions implementation of evaluation policies and practices (in accordance with the (within the context of the assessment of the interdisciplinary research consortia aimed with the direct involvement of research organisations and researchers at all career university’s participatory model) at realising societal impact idc) 2 stages, review and develop criteria for assessing research units and - existing evaluations have been developed with, by and for researchers (action 4) develop an evaluation framework for the assessment of the idc, in research performing organisations, while promoting interoperability consultation with researchers and using the scope framework criteria for projects and researchers deadline 31/12/2024 with the direct involvement of researchers at all career stages, review and develop criteria, tools and processes for the assessment of research projects, research teams objective: facilitate the evaluation of research groups, departments, and faculties and researchers that are adapted to their context of application (action 5) compile and make available existing best practices to support entities that (voluntarily) wish to evaluate their research initiatives 7 and provide transparent - existing communication channels are already utilised for broad communication and objective: make the university’s vision on research evaluation widely known communication, guidance, and training on assessment criteria and processes as well as awareness-raising: website, staff newsletter, etc. (action 6a) further develop the webpages related to research evaluation | their use - several guidelines and frameworks already exist: inspirational frameworks within the https://www.ugent.be/en/research/research-strategy/evaluation career model for professors, guidelines for applicants in bof applications, guidelines deadline 31/12/2027 for evaluators in bof applications, etc. objective: make the university’s vision on research evaluation known to applicants/candidates/researchers undergoing evaluation (action 1c) align the evaluation forms with the vision on research evaluation deadline 31/12/2027 objective: make the university’s vision on research evaluation known to evaluators (action 2c) align the guidelines for evaluators with the vision on research evaluation deadline 31/12/2027 objective: increase awareness regarding the responsible use of quantitative indictors (action 3) update, specify, and widely disseminate the 2017 guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors in the evaluation of research deadline 31/12/2023 objective: organise training regarding the evaluation of research (action 7) identify and analyse the needs in terms of training, information sessions, etc. (targeted at diverse audiences, with specific attention to early career researchers and including evaluators) deadline 31/12/2026 (action 8, subject to the outcome of action 7) organise a pilot training or informational session deadline 31/12/2027 8 exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and beyond the - knowledge exchange occurs, but often in an ad hoc manner and within the context of objective: share knowledge and experiences in an organised manner coalition temporary projects (action 9) take an active role in the coalition for the advancement of research assessment. (no additional commitments outside the coalition are taken) deadline 31/12/2027 9 communicate progress made on adherence to the principles and implementation objective: communicate about the implementation of the agreement on reforming of the commitments research assessment (action 10) report to the research council and the board of governors (evaluation of the action plan) deadline 30/6/2027 (action 6b) inform the broader research community (inside and outside ghent university) through the webpage https://www.ugent.be/en/research/research- strategy/evaluation deadline 31/12/2027 3 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the state-of- - a lot of data is available, through the university’s repositories and research objective: contribute to research on research the-art in research on research, and make data openly available for evidence information systems (action 9) take an active role in the coalition for the advancement of research gathering and research - in the development of the evaluation policy and practices, international literature, assessment. best practices, etc., are already taken into account (action 11) make ghent university’s data available to (external) researchers where possible (no coordinated actions are taken to initiate or encourage research on research) 4
