vasyl stefanyk precarpathian national university coara action plan preamble vasyl stefanyk precarpathian national university is a classical university in the western part of ukraine and the largest university in the precarpathian region. the university is a member of international consortia, including the european university association, the warsaw university and ukrainian universities consortium, the baltic and ukrainian universities consortium, the magna charta universitatum consortium, and an associate member of the european digital univercity (educ) alliance and the universeh space universities consortium. oriented towards european education standards, the university comprises an extensive system of structural units, including 78 departments, 12 faculties, 3 institutes, and 1 college. the university conducts educational and research activities in various fields, including management, physical education, natural sciences, history, political science, international relations, physics, engineering, tourism, philology, mathematics, computer science, psychology, foreign languages, pedagogy, economics, law, and arts. additionally, the university actively collaborates with scientific and educational institutions, implementing innovative projects and initiatives aimed at developing scientific potential and improving the quality of education. by signing the coara agreement, the university undertakes ten main commitments. the pnu action plan outlines the following steps and initiatives aimed at fulfilling these obligations, enhancing the institution's role in international cooperation and academic excellence. starting point action step 1 action step 2 action step 3 reflect on your creation a committee dedicated conducting a discussion to development a plan that strategy and change to identifying and promoting determine the main principles describes the implementation of approach diverse contributions to that are a priority in the reforms in accordance with research. approach to reforming the defined principles. create a university. monitoring and evaluation system for tracking. involve your organizing focus groups and consultations with deans and development a system for institutional community discussions with researchers at directors to take into account effective dissemination of in the change process different career stages to their needs and perspectives successful practices of educ gather opinions and ideas on (shape disciplines). universities. reform issues. identify key challenges conducting a swot (strengths, determination of the authority, development of specific to address weaknesses, opportunities and resources and capabilities of strategies for each identified threats) analysis of the current the university to solve the problem, taking into account research evaluation system. identified challenges. available resources. operational action plan for a 5-year time frame action step 1 action step 2 action step 3 1. recognise the 1.1. forming a committee 1.2. develop guidelines that 1.3. develop and implement diversity of dedicated to identifying and require researchers to credit all responsible research contributions to research assessment policies by creating contributions to, and promoting diverse contributions outputs, using tools like credit a new policy to align with the careers in, research in to research (contributor roles taxonomy). agreement on reforming accordance with the research assessment (arra) needs and nature of and coara commitments. the research timeframe q4 2024 q4 2025 q3 2026 2. base research 2.2 implementation qualitative 2.2. providing training for assessment primarily evaluation mechanisms in researchers and research on qualitative funding instruments for managers on broader evaluation for which research projects, research assessment approaches, review peer review is central, initiatives, and fields (seed appraisal guidance to ensure supported by project). recognition of peer review responsible use of contributions, and offer quantitative indicators guidance on open peer review and peer review credit systems. timeframe q4 2026 ongoing commitment 3. abandon 3.1. promoting the use of 3.2. integrating coara 3.3. monitoring staff awareness inappropriate uses in alternative metrics, such as (coalition for the advancement of the evaluation of responsible research assessment altmetric scores, alongside of research assessment) research by surveying of journal-and traditional metrics for a more principles into existing researchers every two years. publication-based comprehensive assessment. researcher development metrics, in particular regulations, ensuring these inappropriate uses of principles are reflected in journal impact factor relevant university policies and (jif) and h-index guidelines. timeframe q1 2026 q1 2026 q3 2026 4. avoid the use of 4.1. implement internal rankings of research assessment mechanisms that prioritize the university's organisations in mission, values, and strategic research assessment goals over external rankings. timeframe q3 2025 5. commit resources to 5.1. creating a detailed resource 5.2. development and delivering allocation plan to implementing reforming research research assessment reforms. internal training programs for assessment as is research-enabling and needed to achieve the professional services staff on organisational changes responsible research committed to assessment. timeframe q3 2025 ongoing commitment 6. review and develop 6.1. conduct an institutional and 6.2. revise current research 6.3. piloting alternative criteria research assessment national mapping exercise to assessment criteria to align with and assessment tools, such as criteria, tools and analyze current research coara commitments, ensuring descriptive resume formats, processes assessment criteria, tools, and fairness, accountability and competency-based resume processes, identifying gaps and comprehensiveness of formats, and evidence-based opportunities. assessment. resume formats. timeframe q4 2025 q4 2025 q4 2026 7. raise awareness of 7.1. update and share 7.2. providing guidance on best 7.3. promoting opportunities for research assessment information through various practices for conducting fair, research evaluation projects to reform and provide channels such as university objective, and evidence-based apply for funding and actively transparent websites, library services and assessments of research participate in national and communication, research portals about changes contributions and international forums for sharing guidance, and training in research assessment. achievements. best practices and learning in on assessment criteria other institutions. and processes as well as their use timeframe ongoing commitment q4 2025 ongoing commitment 8. exchange practices 8.1. joining online platforms and 8.2. organization of and experiences to communities of practice where symposiums, conferences, and enable mutual learning members can exchange ideas, workshops, that bring together within and beyond the resources, and success stories stakeholders from diverse coalition related to research assessment backgrounds to share reform (openup). experiences and insights on effective research assessment strategies. timeframe q3 2024 ongoing commitment 9. communicate 9.1. dissemination of information 9.2. reporting back on research progress made on about the organization's assessment progress and adherence to the research assessment updates in relevant group principles and processes, including publication meetings and committees to implementation of the of the action plan and its keep stakeholders informed. commitments progress on the university timeframe q1 2025 annually 10. evaluate practices, 10.1. active engagement with 10.2. creation of a schedule for criteria and tools national and international regular review of assessment criteria, tools and processes. based on solid research assessment processes evidence and the and organizations such as state-of-the-art in coara to align internal practice research on research, with the latest principles and and make data openly evidence in research available for evidence assessment. gathering and research timeframe ongoing commitment q1 2025 contacts vasyl stefanyk precarpathian national university 57 shevchenko str., ivano-frankivsk, 76018, ukraine tel.: (+380-342)75-23-51 e-mail: office@pnu.edu.ua web-page: https://pnu.edu.ua
