editors : fotis mystakopoulos, jadranka stojanovski digital object identifier (doi) : 10.5281/zenodo.13345117 document log version date description name/partner v0.1 2024-06-07 full draft for review fotis mystakopoulos/ jadranka stojanovski v0.2 2024- 06-13 executive assembly (ea) all review v0.3 2024-06-14 scientific advisory committee all (sac) review v0.4 2024-08-09 revised draft based on the fotis comments from ea, and sac mystakopoulos/jadranka stojanovski v0.9 2024-08-19 draft version available in fotis mystakopoulos zenodo (restricted mode pending approval by ea) v1.0 2024-11-13 action plan approved by all operas executive assembly after minor changes 1 introduction in 2022, operas research infrastructure joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara), becoming actively involved in efforts to reform research assessment practices. as a committed member of coara, operas is dedicated to publishing an action plan that outlines its consistent support for the implementation of research assessment reform. this action plan is structured as follows: ● section one provides an overview of operas as a research infrastructure highlighting the specific challenges faced by the social sciences and humanities (ssh). ● section two details operas` activities related to research assessment reform from 2023 through the first half of 2024. ● section three outlines the future direction, presenting the action plan for 2025-2027. while acknowledging a five-year plan as suggested by coara, operas is currently at a pivotal stage of its development with a strategic direction to become a european research infrastructure consortium (eric). consequently, the plan will specifically address 2025, 2026 and 2027, considering the potential changes in legal status anticipated in 2027 or 2028. ● section four focuses on the mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating the action plan, emphasising the importance of transparent reporting on the activities, expected outcomes, and behaviours related to the research assessment reform. an annex accompanies this document, presenting a table that aligns the operas action plan with coara commitments. context: operas research infrastructure understanding the context of operas is essential for appreciating the action plan and its implementation timeline. operas supports open scholarly communication in the social sciences and humanities (ssh) within the european research area (era). as a non-research-performing or funding organisation, operas does not evaluate individual researchers, project proposals, or institutions based on traditional productivity metrics. however, its activities and services are closely related to the research assessment. a short description of the services: metrics - empowers open access publishers, university presses, and libraries by providing usage and impact metrics for published content. designed with the nuanced needs of ssh in mind, this service consolidates diverse data sources into a single, transparent interface. gotriple - dedicated platform for ssh publications, researcher profiles, and projects that includes multilingualism, creation of links and connections to different data sources, bridging of disciplines, and integrated services.. pathfinder - designed to help researchers find a solution to their editorial needs in the context of open scholarly communication. prism - gives publishers the opportunity to display information about their peer review procedures in a standardised way, enables inclusion of information as part of the book’s metadata and builds trust in oa book publishing by improving transparency around the quality assurance process. vera - provides a set of tools to discover potential partners and ongoing projects, define and co-design the activities, co-create new knowledge and solutions, and deliver them to society. hypotheses - a platform for humanities and social sciences research blogs. mondaecus - a community-driven translation service platform to foster scholarly collaboration in translating and editing scientific texts. innovation lab - the operas innovation lab is a collaborative initiative dedicated to supporting and advancing innovative services and solutions for scholarly 3 communication in the social sciences and humanities (ssh), paving development pathways for the development of operas research infrastructure operas employs a participatory governance model, including a scientific advisory committee (sac) and an executive assembly (ea), which guide decision-making related to operas activities. it is crucial to highlight how operas values and recognises the contributions of individuals engaged in its governance structure. at an institutional level, operas participates in numerous initiatives, projects, communities, and activities that promote open science practices in ssh and influence research assessment. key efforts include facilitating open access to a range of research outputs, developing open access books, and fostering multilingualism. reforming research assessment is crucial for incentivising researchers to engage with these initiatives. additionally, operas is developing several services indirectly related to research assessment, such as metric tools for open access monographs, a multilingual discovery platform, and a search wizard for finding suitable publishers or service providers. these services exemplify how open science and research assessment reform can mutually reinforce each other. operas has 65 members from 24 countries in the era, and its action plan addresses the challenges and proposes viable solutions. operas activities: 2023-2024 operas activities can be categorised thematically, with some directly related to research assessment and others related to open science practices and participation in funded projects. some key initiatives include: research assessment reform initiatives operas participates in the graspos eu funded project and is leading the ssh pilot to explore how open science can enhance research assessment in the ssh thematic area. this includes several activities: ● supporting community engagement through consultation workshops and the community practice sessions; ● analysing the feedback received on ssh needs and desires regarding research assessment reform; ● providing feedback and recommendations from the community on responsible research assessment from an ssh perspective. an internal workshop for operas coordination team to decide on the strategic direction for research assessment for operas: ● the workshop identified possibilities for incorporating and addressing research assessment as a strategic objective. operas special interest groups (sigs): advocacy sig - 2023-2024 topic: responsible research assessment ● workshop on responsible research assessment by the advocacy sig - blog post best practices sig - topic: peer review ● publication on innovation lab: (open!) peer review: an overview participation in coara working groups: ● multilingualism and language biases in research assessment o task force 3: policy advice and translation tools ● recognising and rewarding peer review o recommendations for peer review of journal articles, books, and projects ● evaluating social sciences and humanities research globally o group to start operations in june 2024 operas conference (april 2024) ● opening keynote, and closing session delivered discussions on research culture and the need for research assessment reform; ● multiple sessions tackling peer review and research assessment; open science practices participation in the diamas project ● acknowledging differences in publication and dissemination practices between disciplinary and transdisciplinary science and the consequences for research evaluation. ● providing recommendations and guidelines for institutional leaders and managers (e.g. rectors, heads of library, research departments) and funders, 5 sponsors, and donors on how to support institutional publishers, service providers and technology providers in creating and disseminating high-quality and interoperable research outputs. ● acknowledging os principles, e.g. early sharing of research outputs in an open, transparent, and reusable fashion, which contributes to increasing the quality of research results, maximises the impact on society, and affects the modus operandi of research funding agencies, research-performing institutions, entities responsible for scholarly communication, and research evaluation agencies. participation in the craft-oa project ● research performing organisations and research funding organisations promote the adoption of persistent identifiers, suitable data models and fair-ification via craft-oa services for responsible research assessment. development of the gotriple discovery platform. ● the gotriple discovery platform is improving coverage of ssh diverse outputs in terms of formats, types of publications, and diversity of languages, a key perspective to support the diversity of careers and outputs in the coara agreement. joining the barcelona declaration as supporters. ● excerpt from the announcement in relation to the barcelona declaration: “becoming a supporter of this declaration is not only a nod to the past of operas and our activities so far, but also a commitment to how we see ourselves moving forward.” operas action plan: 2025-2027 the action plan (see a table format in the annex of a list of actions) will build on the activities of 2023 and 2024, with a focus on how all activities and services can better support research assessment reform from an open science perspective, enhance infrastructure development, foster community engagement and promote dissemination. operas commits to establishing a task force by the end of 2024, comprising members of the scientific advisory committee, the executive assembly and the operas coordination team. the task force will develop qualitative kpis to measure the implementation of the action plan effectively. its primary role will be to strategically plan how operas can support the reform of research assessment, setting specific objectives and targets to review activities annually, with all decisions requiring executive assembly approval. proposed focus areas for the operas research infrastructure from 2025-2027 include: open science directions operas will build on previous activities to explore how eu-funded projects producing outputs for the ssh community can contribute to broader research assessment reform. key projects include: graspos graspos is working towards supporting the emerging policy reforms and paving the way towards an open science aware responsible research assessment system. the ssh pilot lead by operas, will address challenges and provide solutions for critical research assessment issues in ssh producing recommendations, guidelines, general assessment criteria for ssh researchers, and a robust . open science assessment framework. diamas: diamas is a project to promote diamond open access publishing, which highlights the importance of recognising the varying publishing practices across disciplines within research assessment processes.. craft-oa: craft-oa is working to produce the diamond discovery hub (ddh) which aspires to offer an alternative to established indexes like web of science (wos) and scopus. by enhancing ojs core features—such as gdpr compliance, multilingual support, and metadata quality—it aims to improve scientific communication. this improvement is driven by the consistent use of permanent identifiers for research outputs and contributors, which facilitates easier evaluation. palomera: this initiative examines data and policies related to open-access scientific monographs across different european countries. operas infrastructure and services key actions will involve defining precisely the role of operas services in the context of research assessment reform, including: 7 ● building on the workshop to integrate research assessment into the operas strategic objective. ● exploring how services like metrics and prism can support new assessment methods ● creating guidelines for research performing organisations (rpos) and research funding organisations (rfos) on leveraging information from operas services for research assessment activities. ● development of operas innovation lab: the innovation lab is dealing with the topic of research assessment and innovative outputs. both perspectives are useful and relevant to the coara vision, and it can be a useful tool for communicating topics and debates on research assessment for the ssh. community engagement to expand community engagement around research assessment reform, operas will: ● disseminate the action plan, encouraging members of the operas community to participate in its implementation; a secondary aim is for the action plan to serve as an example in the national nodes network inspiring other rpos or rfos to adopt it. ● continue active participation in coara working groups and promote produced outputs to influence policy. ● maintain communication with the ssh community for feedback on research assessment, particularly related to the ssh pilot in the graspos project. ● organise events and joint webinars to foster dialogue on research assessment developments in the operas community. ● advocate for the adoption and testing of the humetricshss initiative and scope evaluation framework. hiring and appointments in the hiring and appointments processes operas will: ● transparently showcase the selection criteria, demonstrating a commitment not only to coara initiatives but to frameworks as dora. ● produce documentation outlining the decision-making process for electing members to the scientific advisory committee. ● inform new operas community members about the organisation's commitment to supporting research assessment reform. ● create or recommend templates for narrative cvs for applicants related to the operas research infrastructure. evaluation and monitoring of activities to ensure transparency in tracking activities against set targets, operas will create a public page on its website (operas-eu.org) by the end of 2024. the task force will decide on the timing and frequency for evaluations, with subsequent reports published on this new website. along the same lines, the task force will provide each year an updated version of the action plan addressing changes, challenges and progress on its key objectives. while qualitative kpis have yet to be established, they will be developed alongside quantitative measurements, to provide a balanced approach. the ultimate aim is to track and understand the long-term impact of all the activities. examples of future activities may include: ● knowledge exchange events (both online and in-person) ● service development and usage monitoring. conclusions and next steps this action plan reminds us of operas's activities in 2023 and 2024 and outlines a pathway for continued efforts from 2025 to 2027. to ensure the ongoing implementation of the action plan, the important action is to set up the task force, consisting of representatives from the operas coordination team, the scientific advisory committee, and the executive assembly. the priority remains setting clear goals, objectives, and qualitative kpis for 2025 in relation to the defined areas of focus from operas research infrastructure. 9 annex table: alignment of operas action plan (ap) to the coara commitments: indicative actions, outcomes, commitments and timeframe. actions outcomes coara commitment - see timeframe range here full agreement. 1. create a task force to oversee produce annual recommendations 5 - commit resources 2024 - 2027: tf to oversee the progress of the coara action on how operas could be positioned implementation of the ap, and to plan to support research assessment perform annual evaluation of efforts e.g. join the barcelona objectives declaration to support open research information in the evaluation process. 2. create monitoring page for monitoring progress to transparently 5 - commit resources 2024 - 2027: tf to oversee the the progress of the action review the development of the action implementation of the ap, and to plan plan perform annual evaluation of objectives 3. operas internal workshop graspos inspired workshop to 7 - training and raising awareness completed - 2023 on research assessment for engage operas employees on internally on research assessment ssh research assessment for ssh: exploring services 4. embed research assessment to produce an objective, key result, 5, 6 - review operas objectives: 2024-2025 reform in the strategic action and kpi for research strategic inclusion of research objectives of operas ri assessment assessment will allow for new annual implementation plan processes to be explored 5. explore the adoption of adopt an existing template and 1, 2 - qualitative assessment of 2024-2025 narrative cvs for application repurpose for applications related to applications for operas positions operas objectives: offer the opportunity to candidates applying for positions within operas, the scientific advisory committee and executive assembly to use a narrative cv 6. engage the wider operas putting research assessment on the 5, 7,8,9 - resources, awareness, 2025-2027 network through the special agenda - discuss with all sigs how communication, training and interest groups they could include conversations on exchange of practice beyond the research assessment coalition 7. advocacy for responsible workshop on responsible research 7,8 - awareness and communication 2023-2024 (completed academic research assessment assessment at the operas 2024 cycle with the focus on the topic of conference: reflecting on the research assessment) workshop: https://operas.hypotheses.org/7395 8. participate in events pubmet 2024: conference with a 7,8 - awareness and communication 2024 organised by national nodes focus on research assessment members (different members of operas will engage with topics of research assessment). 9. submitted an application for application title: advancing research 5, 7,8,9 - resources, awareness, completed - pending outcome of coara boost open call assessment reform in ssh and communication, training and evaluation. exchange of practice beyond the citizen science through training and coalition recognition (citrussh) 11 10. graspos public event on peer assessing open access books: 7,8,9,10 - training, skills, awareness 2024 - completed in may review and research shedding light on peer review with and making data openly available assessment prism: https://graspos.eu/training-material 11. graspos public training on training to be organised in autumn 7,8,9,10 - training, skills, awareness 2024 - completed in november open access books and 2024 to discuss open access books in and making data openly available metrics the research assessment environment, and how to monitor the impact and usage of oa books using operas metrics
