coali1on for advancing research assessment reform - coara ac1on plan tuscan organisa1on of universi1es and research for europe (tour4eu) presenta1on of tour4eu tour4eu (tuscan organisanon of universines and research for europe) is a non-profit associanon under belgian law which brings together the tuscany region and its seven universines (university of florence, university of pisa, university of siena, university for foreigners of siena, imt school for advanced studies lucca, scuola normale superiore and scuola superiore sant'anna) to promote the interests of the tuscan research system at the eu level and to strengthen its internanonalisanon. the associanon is responsible for engaging with european union insntunons and other strategic stakeholders to idennfy and secure opportunines and funding and to promote synergies, internanonalisanon and sciennfic cooperanon. tour4eu represents in brussels a university system of excellence, the tuscan one, composed of more than 8.640 teachers, researchers and doctoral students, 122.898 students, which generates to date 163 university spin-oﬀs and 404 laboratories. tour4eu involvment in the coali1on for advancing research assessment the associanon has acnvely joined the coalinon for advancing research assessment since the beginning of the process, in january 2022. in the following months, the universines of tour4eu that signed the coara agreement are the following: university of florence, university of pisa, university for foreigners of siena, scuola normale superiore, scuola superiore sant'anna and imt school for advanced studies lucca. as research is rapidly evolving, outputs are no longer limited to only publicanons, but involve a broader set of results. for this reason, the associanon calls for enhancing the diversity of research outputs and pracnces, which are crucial elements on which the existence of sciennfic research relies. this includes advocanng for open science pracnces that contribute to research eﬃciency and quality. at the end of february 2023, tour4eu and cnr co-organised an open event in collaboranon with the informal network represennng the italian research and innovanon community in brussels (giuri) with the aim of discussing the framework for the reform of the research evaluanon system. tour4eu - tuscan organisation of universities and research for europe rond-point schuman, 14/5th floor 1000 brussels – belgium website:www.tour4eu.eu the objecnve of the event was twofold: first, to trace the main factors that led to the creanon of coara, second, to foster the debate among italian stakeholders on the potennal impact of this ininanve in italy. tour4eu acnvely parncipated by engaging in a dialogue with representanves from the tuscan universines involved in the research and evaluanon fields, fostering a collaboranve discussion on the coara ininanve's importance and implicanons for the italian and tuscan research ecosystems. since the launch of the call by the coalinon, tour4eu and the tuscan universines have expressed interest in taking part in coara's working groups and are currently part of the following ones: • mul$lingualism and language biases in research assessment (tour4eu, university for foreigners of siena and university of pisa); • experiments in assessment - idea genera$on, co-crea$on, and pilo$ng (imt school for advanced studies lucca); • responsible metrics and indicators (university of pisa and imt school for advanced studies lucca); • improving prac$ces in the assessment of research proposals (university of pisa and university of florence); • towards transforma$ons: transdisciplinary, applied/prac$ce-based research and impact (university of florence); • tier-towards an inclusive evalua$on of research (university of florence, scuola normale superiore and university for foreigners of siena); • global framework for research evalua$on in the social sciences and humani$es (university for foreigners of siena). finally, tour4eu and the tuscan universines acnvely parncipate in the italian ''nanonal chapter'' chaired by the university of bologna and the cnr. tour4eu role in the coali1on: focus and priori1es as tour4eu is an organisanon that is not directly and concretely involved in research and evaluanon processes, its role in the coalinon will consist mainly in facilitanng exchange of knowledge and monitoring acnvines to support its universines in the implementanon of their coara acnon plans and in the working groups acnve parncipanon. tour4eu - tuscan organisation of universities and research for europe rond-point schuman, 14/5th floor 1000 brussels – belgium website:www.tour4eu.eu in order to reach this objecnve, tour4eu commits itself to the following acnons: i) facilitate on a regular basis the flow of informanon from the coara secretariat to the universines in order to promote parncipanon in the ininanves, exchange of good pracnces and cascading calls launched by the coalinon. timeframe: from 2024. ii) organise at least once per year a meenng with tuscan universines and the research and higher educanon department of the tuscany region on the progress of the universines acnon plans’ implementanon to ensure coherence with the regional ecosystem policies and to inform on the nanonal chapter and the working groups acnvines within the coara coalinon. timeframe: from 2024. iii) support tuscan universines in the realisanon of seminars and events within their acnon plans to raise awareness of open science pracnces and coara principles within the academic community, ensuring that everyone is informed and engaged. timeframe: from 2024. iv) contribute to organise a seminar per year within the informal network represennng the italian research and innovanon community in brussels (giuri) in accordance with the italian nanonal chapter chairs with the objecnve to monitor and foster the exchange of informanon with the other italian organisanons involved in the coara and promote the ininanve with insntunons not yet involved. timeframe: from 2025. v) parncipate to events and contribute to the realisanon of the acnon plan within the mul$lingualism and language biases in research assessment working group, in parncular chairing the sub-group language learning and skills in partnership with university for foreigners of siena and university of pisa already present in the group. timeframe: from 2024. vi) contribute to the nanonal chapter under university of bologna and cnr coordinanon and update on mul$lingualism and language biases in research assessment working group acnvines. timeframe: from 2024 tour4eu - tuscan organisation of universities and research for europe rond-point schuman, 14/5th floor 1000 brussels – belgium website:www.tour4eu.eu vii) devote in tour4eu website a session on coara and tuscan universines acnvines including acnon plans addressed to researchers in order to strengthen transparent communicanon and understanding. promote arncles and acnvines in the tour4eu social media. timeframe: from mid - 2024 tour4eu - tuscan organisation of universities and research for europe rond-point schuman, 14/5th floor 1000 brussels – belgium website:www.tour4eu.eu
