approved by resolution no. spn-33 of 21 may 2024 of the senate of vilnius university the action plan for the implementation of the commitments of the research assessment reform agreement of vilnius university vilnius university (hereinafter the ‘university’) has 15 faculties with over 23,000 students across bachelor, master, and doctoral study cycles, employs over 3,000 academic employees, and implements research in more than 30 fields. the diversity of research fields is acknowledged in the statute of the university – the main document regulating the activity of the university. at the university, different research results and research papers created in different research fields are assessed. following the tradition, such diversity is integrated into many processes implemented at the university. the expert assessment as the main instrument for assessing research has been applied at the university for over a decade, and national and international experts are involved in the processes of recruiting academic employees. the university also highlights the importance of academic leadership and training of early-career researchers (for detailed information, see the vilnius university regulations for the organisation of teaching staff and research/art staff recruiting competitions and certification approved by resolution of the senate of vilnius university no. s-2018-12-4 of 20 november 2018 “on the approval of the vilnius university regulations for the organisation of teaching staff and research/art staff recruiting competitions and certification” (wording of resolution of the senate of vilnius university no. spn-56 of 19 december 2023) (hereinafter the ‘regulations’). part of budget appropriations received by the university is allocated for research activities carried out by university researchers (these appropriations are distributed in accordance with the descriptions of the formal assessment of research and experimental development and artistic activities of universities and research institutes as well as the comparative expert assessment of research and experimental development of universities and research institutes approved by order of the minister of education and science of the republic of lithuania no. v-1593 of 2 september 2021 “on the implementation of items 2(3)–2(4) of resolution of the government of the republic of lithuania no. 149 of 1 march 2017 “on the implementation of the republic of lithuania law on higher education and research””). in november 2022, the university joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (hereinafter the ‘coara’), expressing the aim to implement the research assessment reform agreement. taking into account the coalition agreement of 19 july 2022 and following the fundamental principles of coara established thereby, members of the coalition shall undertake to implement an action plan, based on which the institution's documents related to research assessment are reviewed and updated. the draft regulations, approved by resolution of the senate of vilnius university no. spn-56 of 19 december 2023, were prepared in order to implement the amendments of the republic of lithuania law on higher education and research and other related legal acts establishing required and preferred competencies for career stages of teaching staff and research/art staff and the scope of skills corresponding to each career stage. a wide discussion on the regulations resulted in the representation of all research areas and fields at the university in the amendment of legal acts and preparation of new recommendations for legal documents (and processes) of the university related to the implementation of the regulation by taking into account both lithuanian legal regulation and also coara commitments related to research activities and their assessment processes. the table presents the action plan for implementation of the commitments of the research assessment reform agreement of vilnius university. it should be noted that not all commitments set out in the coalition agreement have been included in the plan. the commitments listed here are the ones to the implementation of which the university may directly contribute. coara description of activities result deadline commitment implementation of commitments 1. to recognise the the current system of 1. establishment of working groups april diversity of research assessment at the working groups that established. 2024 contributions to and university covers such will represent different careers in research indicators (among others) as research fields to in accordance with ranking or citation counts identify criteria for the needs and nature and other qualitative assessment of of the research. indicators (metrics) of researcher career journals publishing research stages and to suggest articles. the commitment possible amendments will be implemented to to the regulations. achieve these aims: - recognition of research diversity and integration of 2. preparation of the the draft november diverse research activity draft regulations. regulations 2024 into the regulations. prepared for consideration. 2. to base research the university should 1. preparation of a set of november assessment primarily recognise and assess recommendations for recommendations 2025 on qualitative diverse forms of research qualitative assessment approved evaluation for which results, apply qualitative and selection criteria according to the peer review is assessment criteria and take for procedure central, supported by the specificity of research recruiting/certification established by the responsible use of fields into account. the commissions and the university. quantitative improvement of the central admissions indicators. application of assessment commission. criteria and methodologies should foster the practice based on qualitative 2. preparation of guidelines for november assessment and inclusive guidelines for candidates 2025 research culture. the aims candidates for prepared. of this commitment: university positions. - qualitative indicators to be applied only to 3. consultations and the members of january determine the eligibility training of the the 2026 for participation in a members of recruiting/certifica competition; recruiting/certification tion commissions - qualitative assessment to commissions and the and the central be recognised as the main members of the admissions principle of competition central admissions commission procedures; commission. prepared for – consultations and selection of training of the members of candidates. recruiting/certification commissions of the 4. review and the rector’s december 2026 amendment of orders/senate university legal acts resolutions reviewed related to the and amended. assessment of the outcome of academic activity. 3. to avoid using although metrics are a 1. preparation for an meetings with core november 2025 research convenient tool of expert assessment of academic units, organisation assessment, it does not research and consultations. rankings when always reflect the experimental assessing academic quality and relevance of development activity preparation of the december 2025 achievements (to research outcomes as of research and study development plans avoid using well as their impact on institutions in 2028. of research fields. indicators applied the society. moreover, in these rankings the specificity and for the assessment diversity of research of individual should be taken into monitoring of december 2027 researchers). consideration (e.g. academic interdisciplinary achievements of research , dissemination research fields of research outcomes in developed at the other language than university. english). the aims of this commitment: - to avoid ranking academic achievements by using metrics. 4. to develop this commitment will be implemented when performing the activities december 2027 qualitative research provided for in commitments no. 2 and 4. assessment criteria by improving assessment procedures, tools, and processes. 5. to raise it is very important to december 2026 awareness of introduce the 1. university training of research assessment academic community employees university reform and provide of vilnius university administrating employees transparent to the latest admissions and administrating communication, approaches and share certification recruitment guidance, and the latest research procedures. prepared for training on assessment trends. selection of assessment criteria the processes must be candidates. and processes as transparent and well- well as their use. formed. the guidelines of assessment criteria, assessment procedures, and criteria for decision- making must be available for all parties concerned. the aims of this commitment: 2. creation of the online platform. december 2026 - introduce the platform intended culture of the for questions and qualitative answers related assessment in the with recruiting and university certification community and requirements and create conditions for processes as well inclusive as quality. contribution to the assessment. implementation of the coalition agreement; - provide the required assistance and recommendations for 3. promotion of open more active november 2024 the participants in science activities, participation of the the assessment inclusion of research university process. data into the research community and data sharing platform non-academic midas (where employees in open applicable). science activities, visits of open science experts, trainings of non- academic employees. 6. exchange it is essential to foster active participation in university’s december practices and collaboration and coara activities and community 2027 experiences to accelerate progress discussion groups, contributing to the enable mutual toward effective notification of the implementation of learning within and evaluation processes. by university community coara beyond the exchanging insights and on the implementation coalition. strategies with coara of coalition groups, institutions can agreements, ongoing learn from one another’s discussions and achievements and decisions, challenges. it will lead to organisation of the development of a discussions. unified system.
