coalition for advancing research assessment reforming research assessment: coara action plan radboud university date 30 may 2024 subject reforming research assessment: coara action plan radboud university prepared by franke van der molen status established by executive board version number 1.0 radboud university p.o. box 2345 houtlaan 4 4567 ae nijmegen 6525 xz nijmegen the netherlands +31 (0)24 361 61 61 www.ru.nl 1. introduction the universities of the netherlands collectively decided to enter the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) by signing the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) in 2022. daniël wigboldus, president of the executive board of radboud university, signed the agreement on behalf of radboud university in november 2022. one of the obligations in arra is that participating organisations share with each other and with their communities how they are implementing the core commitments according to an action plan. this document is intended to fulfil this obligation, by describing the actions that radboud university has taken and will take to reform its practices and principles of research assessment in the context of coara and other relevant initiatives and developments. 1 2. context: existing frameworks and initiatives radboud university has been involved for a longer time in initiatives to improve research assessment. for instance, research assessment at the level of research institutes has been improved through the iterated review and revision of the national strategy evaluation protocol, which corresponds with the main principles of coara. the sep notably corresponds with the first three commitments of coara that concern the recognition of diverse contributions to research, the importance of qualitative evaluation for which peer review is essential, and the responsible use of quantitative indicators and metrics. furthermore, the assessment of academics and support staﬀ is currently under revision in the recognition & rewards (r&r) program of radboud university (2023-2026), which is embedded in the national recognition and rewards program. r&r aims to better recognise and reward the diverse work of academics, to focus more on the quality of all types of academic work, and to devote greater attention to all areas in which university staﬀ is active, including research, teaching, impact, patient care and leadership. furthermore, it aims to realise a fundamental change in career perspectives for university staﬀ and in behaviour and leadership with regards to the recognition and rewards system in academia. the radboud vision on recognition and rewards serves as the foundation for the university’s recognition and rewards program. the actions on reforming research assessment will be executed in consultation and collaboration with this program. 3. main actions by entering coara, radboud university has bound itself to the core commitments. appendix 1 provides a comprehensive overview of these commitments, and how these translate into actions at radboud university. several actions are already ongoing, for instance in the context of the r&r program. the following actions to reform research assessment are new: 1. formulate principles for the responsible use of research metrics in the assessment of academics (milestone 1: 2025). 2. develop and implement a framework, building on milestone 1, for qualitative research evaluation and responsible use of quantitative indicators in the context of assessing, 1 these other initiatives and developments include the san fransisco declaration on research assessment (dora), the open science movement, the strategy evaluation protocol (sep) for research assessment in the netherlands, and the recognition and rewards program of dutch public research organizations. 1 hiring and promoting academics (milestone 2: development 2025-2026, implementation 2027). this framework will incorporate team science, i.e. the contributions of academics to team eﬀorts and the assessment of teams as collectives. 3. review existing criteria and processes, including in relation to the sep, for the assessment of quality and impact of research at the level of research institutes. inventory the demand for additional guidance and services, including research intelligence (milestone 3: 2025). 4. develop additional guidance, support and/or services, focusing on research quality and societal impact, for research assessment at the level of research institutes (milestone 4: development 2026, implementation 2027). this may include guidance and support to both research institutes and assessment committees. communication progress and results of the actions will be periodically communicated in existing networks and consultations within radboud university. where relevant, communication on reforming research assessment will be embedded in the communication on the recognition and rewards program. evaluation the actions will be finalized at the end of 2027. at that time, the first cycle of review and development of assessment criteria, tools and processes will be completed. an evaluation of the actions will take place after 2027. 4. organization • the actions on reforming research assessment will be coordinated and executed by a working group of 6-8 policy oﬃcers and managing directors, with participants from radboud services, faculties and research institutes. • the actions will be executed under the guidance of the vice deans of research of radboud university. the working group will report to the vice deans of research. • the executive board is ultimately responsible for research quality assurance and establishes new or revised guidelines on research assessment. the vice deans of research give advice to the executive board on these matters. • the working group will collaborate with, and ask for input and feedback from, existing academic communities and consultation platforms of radboud university. • where relevant, the working group will consult and collaborate with the r&r project team and steering committee. 2 appendix 1: commitments and actions coara commitment current state of aﬀairs at radboud university actions + milestones recognise the diversity of contributions to, and this recognition of diversity lies at the core of the the r&r-project on development paths is ongoing, careers in, research in accordance with the radboud recognition and rewards program and is deadline 2024. needs and nature of the research addressed, among other things, in the project development paths that is part of this program. abandon inappropriate uses in research this principle is already implemented in research • milestone 1: formulate principles for responsible assessment of journal- and publication-based assessment at the level of research institutes (sep). use of metrics in the assessment of academics. metrics, radboud university currently has no general guidelines for the application of journal- and publication-based metrics in research assessment at the level of individual academics. base research assessment primarily on this principle is already implemented in research • review assessment practices and criteria at the qualitative evaluation for which peer review is assessment at the level of research institutes (sep). level of individual academics. this is an ongoing central, supported by responsible use of action in the r&r program / development paths quantitative indicators in the assessment of individual academics, the project. application of more qualitative assessment approaches • milestone 2: develop a framework for qualitative may be further supported and strengthened. evaluation and responsible use of quantitative indicators and metrics in the context of assessing, hiring and promoting academics. this framework will incorporate the assessment of team science. avoid the use of rankings of research radboud university has a critical and nuanced engage in further actions, together with other dutch organisations in research assessment approach towards international rankings and works universities, aimed towards the responsible together with other dutch universities in furthering the application of and communication on rankings. responsible use of rankings. radboud university does not use international rankings in its assessment of research. commit resources to reforming research radboud university has allocated resources for the the members of the working group will contribute on assessment as is needed to achieve the execution of the recognition & rewards and open an in kind basis. the working group will make use of organisational changes committed to. science programs. existing networks and consultation structures. 3 review and develop research assessment for research assessment at the level of research • milestone 3: review existing criteria and criteria, tools and processes institutes, assessment criteria, tools and processes are processes for the assessment of quality and already in place but may be further improved. impact of research at the level of research institutes. inventory the demand for criteria, tools and processes for the assessment of additional guidance and services, including individual academics may be further developed and research intelligence. applied. this is an objective of the r&r program. • milestone 4: develop additional guidance, support and/or services, focusing on research quality and societal impact, at the level of research institutes. • see also milestones 1 and 2. raise awareness of research assessment raising awareness within the organization is an training, guidance and support to assessment panels, reform and provide transparent objective of the communication strategy of the r&r committees, and juries will be included, where communication, guidance, and training on program. applicable, in the implementation phases of assessment criteria and processes as well as milestones 2 and 4. their use. exchange practices and experiences to enable the dutch universities collaborate and exchange radboud university will continue to collaborate in the mutual learning within and beyond the practices and experiences in various ways, including the context of unl, the national recognition & rewards coalition. national recognition & rewards program and program, and possibly a coara national chapter. collaboration on research quality assurance. communicate progress made on adherence to progress updates will be communicated through the principles and implementation of the existing networks and consultations and, where commitments. relevant, as part of the r&r communication strategy. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on the cycle of review and development of assessment solid evidence and the state-of-the-art in criteria, tools and processes will be completed by the research on research, and make data openly end of 2027. an evaluation is expected to take place available for evidence gathering and research subsequently, in 2028. 4
