maastricht university coara action plan coalition for advancing research assessment publication date: 25-7-2024 version: 1.0 author: nilam khalil (academic affairs) consulted: research platform, faculty research policy advisors, um leadership academy, muo-hr, muo-academic affairs, university library established by the executive board contents 1. introduction ............................................................................................................................ 3 2. recognition and rewards ...................................................................................................... 4 2. open science ......................................................................................................................... 7 3. strategy evaluation protocol ................................................................................................. 8 4. rankings ................................................................................................................................ 9 5. implementation .................................................................................................................... 10 appendix a: actions related to the core commitments ........................................................... 12 appendix b: action plan timeline ........................................................................................... 14 1. introduction maastricht university is one of the youngest universities in the netherlands and has a strong international identity. located in the southernmost province, the university is close to the borders of neighbouring countries belgium and germany. this enables our university to look and work across borders, together with our international partners, and attract staff and students from abroad that believe in our vision of establishing a sustainable and caring community. as the european university of the netherlands, our core values encompass diversity and inclusivity, sustainability, mutual respect, integrity, democratic principles and transparency. our ambition is to be a catalyst for euregional and european development and, building on this foundation, to forge links with the world to tackle global challenges.1 the university consists of 6 different faculties excelling in their own disciplinary fields ranging from health and life sciences to arts and culture, and frequently engaging in interdisciplinary collaboration in both research and education. um houses 22,406 students of whom 57% has foreign nationality and 2430 fte of academic staff of whom 46% has foreign nationality. 2 we operate in a dutch higher education ecosystem that includes 13 other universities funded by public means, either directly or via competitive means through the dutch research council (nwo). the universities operate very much in collaboration with each other, most notably through the national coalition of dutch universities: unl (universiteiten van nederland).3 research vision our university believes that embracing change and adapting to the evolving demands of the scientific world should be an integral part of our organisational evolution. in terms of research we are therefore committed to the principles of open science and interdisciplinary research, and actively promote and support good practices in terms of scientific integrity and research ethics. we recognize the impact and effectiveness of team performance and how each individual contributes in their own way to the team effort. it is only natural that with the focus on team performance our expectations of each individual and of research in general should not only be based on the quantity of publications but on the actual quality, content and creativeness of research. it is for this reason that maastricht university was at the forefront of the national recognition and rewards programme with the publication of the position paper room for everyone’s talent in 2019,4 which envisions a new way of recognizing and rewarding academics, including a reform of the way that we assess individual research. in parallel to the development of the recognition and rewards programme, the national research assessment protocol (strategy evaluation protocol 2021-2027), was changed substantially from previous protocols. these changes were in line with national developments related to recognition and rewards, open science and scientific integrity and ethics. the momentum generated from these developments has since led to significant changes in the way that we conduct research assessment, and enabled us to commit to the future advancement of research assessment and participation in the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). coara commitments by signing the coara agreement maastricht university is committed to reforming the way that we assess research and researchers, by recognising the diverse outputs, practices and activities that 1 strategic programme 2022-2026: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/file/umstrategicprogramme2022- 2026a4engpdf 2 facts and figures: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/about-um/organisation/facts-figures 3 unl: https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/en/who-we-are 4 room for everyone’s talent: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/file/positionpaperroomforeveryonestalentpdf maximise the quality and impact of research. the agreement that forms the basis of the coalition describes several core commitments that we have to implement. these are the following: 1. , . 2. . 3. , in particular inappropriate uses of the journal impact factor (jif) and h- index. 4. . several supporting commitments have been defined to help achieve the core commitments. 5. as needed to achieve the organisational changes to which the coalition is committed. 6. . 7. . 8. . 9. . 10. , . our institution has already started or implemented several policy reforms that align with the core commitments of the agreement. this includes activities such as the implementation of the recognition and rewards programme, signing the declaration on research assessment (dora), conducting regular mandatory research assessments according to the principles defined within the new strategy evaluation protocol, supporting researchers in using responsible metrics,5 and our commitment to open science, which include maximizing open access and fair6 data use. the goal of the um action plan is to provide details on these existing activities, their implementation and future actions, and how they link with the commitments described within the agreement. the action plan is designed as a living document, adaptable to new developments and insights in research assessment reform. 2. recognition and rewards the publication of the position paper room for everyone’s talent inspired the national recognition and rewards (r&r) programme in which all dutch universities participate. rianne letschert, current um president, co-led the programme together with the rector of the vrije universiteit of amsterdam. traditionally, excelling in research was the predominant way to make a career in academia. all other tasks, such as education, were as a result often considered of lesser value because they did not offer many career opportunities. r&r aims to change this. it challenges us to open up the way in which we look at career development, the way we value our diverse interests and talents, and how we create career opportunities for our colleagues, both at a local and national level, and hopefully in the future at an international level. the main goals of the r&r 5 library research intelligence support: https://library.maastrichtuniversity.nl/research/evaluating- research/research-intelligence/ 6 the fair principles form a research data management guideline covering the findability, accessibility, interoperability and reusability of research data programme align with the first and second core commitments of coara and are formulated as follows: • diversification and vitalisation of career paths • balance between individuals and the collective • focus on quality • stimulate open science • encourage academic leadership as a young and pioneering university, these objectives strongly resonate with um. combined with the active involvement of our university leadership, this allows us to dedicate resources and commitment to pursue these objectives together with our community. our own ambitions with regard to the programme are described within our um vision on r&r. this vision was used as a starting point to engage with our community and involve them in making the necessary cultural changes within our organisation. the vision encompasses education, research, impact, leadership, and, when relevant, patient care. it recognizes the need for a culture change, a change in mindset and leadership that transcends hr management, organisational structures and quality assurance. this necessitates diversified career paths, emphasis on personal growth, fair and transparent procedures, and maintaining a balance between individual and organisational needs. diversified career paths allow individuals to develop in various key areas, recognizing and rewarding diverse competences and talents. fair and transparent procedures ensure that performance indicators align with career goals, maintaining baseline competencies. personal growth is not only about climbing the academic ladder but also about learning new skills, excelling in one's strengths, and feeling appreciated. in order to ensure a healthy organisation a balance should be maintained between the needs of the organisation and the ambition of the individual. having more diversified career paths does not mean anything goes. this requires awareness by academics that pursuing a career at um will have its expectations on productivity and output as is the case within any organisation. organisational units should also be aware that they need to consider the mix of competences and profiles needed to strengthen the team and achieve their objectives. to realize the next steps, four committees were formed in 2020 to further explore these objectives, initiate discussion with the faculties, and develop narratives in the key areas of education, research, impact and leadership. these narratives were then translated into broadly- defined assessment criteria and quality indicators, reflecting the diverse traditions and requirements of different academic disciplines, as well as taking into account the national recognition & rewards framework. these efforts resulted in new guidelines for employee recruitment, selection, assessment, development and promotion. the complete project timeline for realizing the vision was as follows: • phase 1: committee consultations (2020) • phase 2: community dialogue and brainstorm phase (february 2021- july 2021) • phase 3: implementation phase (july 2021 – december 2022) during the third phase, the narratives of the committees were used by an hr working group to develop new academic profiles for the majority of academic positions, from professors to postdocs to teaching experts with7 and without8 patient care. these profiles clarify what is expected of 7 academic profiles with patient care: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/file/maastrichtuniversitycultuurwaardenproject221069a33- luikfolderengmetpatientcaredefpdf 8 academic profiles without patient care: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/nl/file/maastrichtuniversitycultuurwaardenproject221069a33- luikfolderengzonderpatientcaredefpdf academic staff. academics can use them to help shape their careers in consultation with their managers, while assessors will be able to use them as guidelines for evaluation. they are not checklists, but tools that can underpin and facilitate a continuous, wide-ranging dialogue on the employee’s development. in line with the academic profiles, a subcommittee also developed the um career compass,9 which provides a guide for a new manner in which annual development interviews can be conducted. an important part of the r&r programme is the development of new assessment criteria and indicators for evaluating research. the research intelligence team from the university library participated in the um portfolio working group. within that context, they developed material for a website that provides information on what type of qualitative and quantitative indicators researchers can use in an evidence-based narrative cv.10 the website also contains a navigation tool on how to collect indicators that are specific for an individual’s narrative. this website is referred to in the um career compass, and the information on it can also be filtered based on the assessment components from the um career compass. since 2023, the focus has been on involving all staff in the development of a positive learning culture in line with r&r philosophy, in which everyone takes responsibility in and for their development. these next steps are outlined within the um career development policy memo 2023- 2028, which presents a new um career development hr policy for both academic and support staff. the um career development policy document proposes several possible actions for the organisation that relate to the coara commitments: • establish a personal annual development budget for each employee (for smaller activities) as well as creating budgetary room for training and development in each department. • revise the terms of employment um selection model (cao-keuzemodel in dutch), by including more development-oriented offers, such as a literature budget, a contribution to exchange activities, or study trips. • investigate the establishment of a rewards programme, which enables managers across the university as a whole to give performance-based rewards to colleagues. • give special attention to stimulating and rewarding teamwork across departments and disciplines. • each department/unit/faculty/service centre should map the way that they are organized and which tasks are done where, this to provide transparency, increase awareness and (horizontal) mobility. • enhance learning by visiting other universities and organisations to gain inspiration and new ideas. • rethink internal mobility by simplifying job-back guarantees and financial factors. • increase visibility of development opportunities on our new intranet and improve internal? communication. • encourage mentorship by facilitating connections between mentors and mentees. • develop traineeship programmes in various professional areas to nurture talent and growth. the implementation of the career development policy and the specific actions described above involved a series of strategic meetings with our central units, faculties and service centres. the goal of these meetings was to discuss insight and ideas on how to move forward with the proposed actions. part of this is also the development of a people strategy that consists of five different 9 um career compass: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/file/um-career-compass-assistant-associate-and- full-professors-enpdf 10 website online library evidence based narrative cv’s: https://library.maastrichtuniversity.nl/research/evaluating-research/research-intelligence/narrative- cv/?nowprocket=1&wpv-wpcf-type-of-impact-you-want-to- show%5b%5d=open+science&wpv_view_count=4211977 programme lines, such as an engage, perform and develop line. this programme line is aimed at improving internal mobility of staff and offering tools for mentorship and leadership development. to evaluate the development and implementation of the recognition and rewards programme at um and to ensure that the r&r philosophy takes root within the organisation, several different initiatives are currently being explored. • an advisory board dedicated to r&r was established in 2024, and consists of members from both scientific and support staff that have been in one way or another involved in the development of the r&r programme. • in parallel, faculty liaisons are currently tasked with monitoring developments within the faculty with regard to r&r and providing an overview of these developments via a faculty implementation plan. the goal of these plans is not to measure the results but to inspire cross-faculty exchange of good practices. • in addition, focus groups will be conducted in the fall of 2024, with two focus groups per faculty that will engage in an in-depth discussion about the experience and impact of r&r in their own environment. these groups will include both decision makers as well as researchers. to encourage cross-faculty exchange, the focus groups within each faculty will be moderated by a dean from another faculty. • separately, the maastricht young academy, which consists of talented young academics involved in science policy, are also conducting their own survey to evaluate the implementation of r&r and how this has impacted young academics. 2. open science the goal of open science is to enable open and accessible research with the aim to increase transparency, equity and rigor in science. the objective of maastricht university is to become a university where open science is the norm. the way in which um strives to achieve this is described in the um open science policy 2022-2026.11 this policy is an update of the open science policy that was adopted in 2019 and foresees the next step in maintaining and extending the progress that has been made in achieving this objective. concretely the goal of the policy is to ensure that all researchers are familiar with the principles of open science and understand how to achieve the following goals: • publish research results open access or make them openly available • apply fair principles to research output such as data and software • relate to the public and address societal concerns in research • make educational materials available to others • stimulate the preregistration of research • promote the recognition and reward of open science to make open science the norm the policy also describes several actions for 2022-2026 that relate to the facilitation and support of open science. these actions vary from developing awareness campaigns for the open science webpage to embedding open science in the on boarding of new employees and education. related to the last point, um has also established several mandatory general phd trainings/courses.12 all starting phd candidates are required to complete the training, preferably in the first year of their phd trajectory. one of these trainings focuses on open science. part of this training is an interactive multidisciplinary session where phd 11 um open science policy 2022-2026: https://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/file/um-open-science-policy- update-2022-v13pdf 12 um general phd trainings: https://library.maastrichtuniversity.nl/research/research-essentials/um-general- phd-trainings/ candidates from different faculties participate in exchanging views and to broaden their perspective on the theme. next to the open-science-encompassing actions that apply to all faculties, the policy also proposed that each faculty develop their own open science action plans. in the faculty action plans the faculties describe what actions they intend to take related to open science within the time frame described in the policy (2022-2026), and how these relate to their own strategy and discipline(s). the action plans were developed in 2023 and are currently being implemented. they are also discussed in the yearly meetings with the executive board. to support the faculties, the university library will also develop their own action plan in 2024. open science can be considered part of the same culture change in academia that r&r is part of. such a culture change requires involvement of the academic community. at um we have a dedicated open science community (oscm) that is actively engaged in promoting open science within our institution. together with other similar partner communities across the netherlands, they provide information on open science and (co-)organize events to create awareness, such as the national open science festival. locally our oscm organizes fair coffee lectures and workshops on diverse topics for researchers who are interested in open science and fair data practices. to further support these types of activities, the oscm is looking to appoint a dedicated community manager with funding that was awarded by the open science nl initiative. a proposal is also being drafted for a recognition and rewards funding call for open science nl.13 if awarded, the um’s project aims to embed open science as criterion in the development, assessment, appointment and promotion of university staff. the results from such a project could benefit our r&r programme implementation in line with our coara commitments to . the transition to open science requires us to adapt the way that we assess the quality of research. the movement for research assessment reform and open science are therefore intricately linked with each other14. the efforts of maastricht university w.r.t. open science will create the ideal scientific environment and culture where the shift to responsible research assessment practices will thrive. vice-versa the progress made reforming our research assessment system can also stimulate the practice of open science. 3. strategy evaluation protocol all academic research within the netherlands is evaluated every six years on a rolling basis. the national framework through which these evaluations take place is defined within the strategy evaluation protocol (sep). this protocol was developed and adopted by the universities of the netherlands (unl), the dutch research council (nwo), and the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences (knaw). the protocol is adapted every six years to account for new developments that relate to research assessment within the dutch academic environment. the aim of the sep is to maintain and improve the quality and societal relevance of research as well as to facilitate continuous dialogue about research quality, societal relevance and viability in the context of research quality assurance. this is achieved by assessing a research unit according to its own goals and strategy. such assessments are conducted by an independent assessment committee of experts. the protocol describes the process through which this style of peer review assessment, based on a self-evaluation report by the research unit and a site visit, can be conducted. the 13 open science funding call: https://www.openscience.nl/calls/erkennen-en-waarderen-van-open-science- ronde-2024-0 14 research assessment in the transition to open science: https://eua.eu/downloads/publications/research%20assessment%20in%20the%20transition%20to%20open% 20science.pdf current framework, sep 2021-2027, was updated substantially to align with the goals of r&r15. changes include: • the removal of quantitative assessment categories, such as ‘world leading’, ‘very good’ and ‘satisfactory’, with a new focus on evaluating a research unit in light of its own aims and strategy. this is in part to dissuade benchmarking/national ranking via sep assessments and to focus more on qualitative assessment by the committee. • the protocol explicitly follows the guidelines of the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora)16. for example, the research unit should not include journal impact factors in a sep evaluation, nor should the committee refer to impact factors. the use of individual bibliometric indicators such as the h-index is discouraged. • open science has been added as a specific aspect on which the assessment will focus. specific aspects are integral to each of the three assessment criteria mentioned above. in this way, open science is framed as an integral part of how research quality and societal relevance can be achieved. • additional criteria for the composition of the assessment committee have been defined to include at least one phd candidate and one early-/mid-career researcher. this is to ensure sufficient diversity in the composition of the committee and to provide additional focus in the assessment on early career development and phd supervision/education. um has adopted the new sep since 2021 and has conducted many research assessments of its individual research units and faculties according to the new protocol. as the protocol also requires our research units to provide some quantitative evidence of their performance, our research intelligence (ri) team at our central library provides support in responsible metrics. for this purpose the ri team has developed a dashboard that can analyse and visualize data sets relevant for sep evaluations, such as the pure database, incites citation index and altmetrics17. the dashboard can provide indicators based on responsible practices that are in line with dora and the leiden manifesto18. to evaluate the workability and effectiveness of the current sep 2021-2027, a national working group has been established via unl to conduct a midterm review of the protocol. this midterm review will be performed by an independent bureau and will involve the consultation of various national stakeholders on their experience with the protocol. the plan is to start the midterm evaluation in april 2024 and to share the results of the evaluation at the end of 2024. the outcomes of the midterm evaluation will also determine the direction and framework of the future sep 2027-2033. the development of the new sep will start in q1 2025 and will finish with the publication of the protocol in q1 2026. um will be involved in the national discussion for the development of the new sep and will be committed to ensuring that the changes in the new sep will continue to be in line with established r&r ambitions and the coara commitments. 4. rankings based on the advice of a national expert group on rankings, the dutch universities have agreed to adopt a more critical stance towards global university rankings. the expert group argues that it is nearly impossible to translate a university’s performance in research, education, and impact into a one-dimensional total score. furthermore, rankings conflict with the r&r philosophy, and the methodology used is questionable and lacks transparency. although um still provides data for various international rankings, the results are not analysed within the organisation. the use of rankings within the organisation has been given increasingly less priority for several years. the 15 sep 2021-2027: https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/files/publications/sep_2021-2027.pdf 16 dora declaration: https://sfdora.org/read/ 17 um ri dashboard: https://researchintelligence-static.library.maastrichtuniversity.nl/welcome_page.html 18 leiden manifesto: https://www.nature.com/articles/520429a results are not used for policy analyses or sep evaluations, for example. academic staff indicate that international rankings do not influence their career choice for working at um. in line with the national agreement and the advice of the expert group, um is pursuing the following future actions to enact a cultural change regarding the use of rankings. these actions align with the fourth coara commitment. institutional level: • the um website will be adapted to explain the limitations of rankings. • um will support and recognize the more than our rank initiative.19 • the um will explore, together with other universities, whether the data we provide for the the and qs rankings can be made public. • the um will determine whether it can actively participate (data provision) in alternative multi-dimensional rankings, with a focus initially on u-multirank.20 national level: • unl will initiate discussions and seek input from universities on alternatives to rankings. • unl will inform national and regional media about the stance that dutch universities have taken regarding rankings. around the time of major ranking publications unl will ask the media to report responsibly or less frequently on the position of universities in the rankings. • um does not use any of the consultancy services and does not provide e-mail addresses for surveys delivered by ranking bodies. international level: • um will participate in a young european research universities network (yerun) working group that will critically evaluate participation in international rankings within the network. 5. implementation each of the described initiatives/programmes is coordinated by different groups and departments within um. open science is coordinated by the university library, while the recognition and rewards program is coordinated by the um leadership academy. academic affairs is responsible for the coordination of strategy evaluation protocol research assessments and international rankings. academic affairs will oversee the follow-up of actions related to the coara commitments (see appendix a), working in collaboration with the coordinators of the various initiatives. an annual review will be conducted to assess the progress of these actions (see appendix b), and if necessary the plan will be updated accordingly. um is also collaborating with other dutch universities through unl and internationally via the yerun network on these efforts. 19 more than our rank: https://inorms.net/more-than-our-rank/ 20 u-multirank: https://www.umultirank.org appendix a: actions related to the core commitments commitments status future actions recognise the diversity of commitment via open establish advisory board r&r contributions to, and careers in, science policy and r&r research in accordance with the programme, such as the review implementation of r&r related needs and nature of the development of new policies and guidelines within the um research academic profiles, um career compass and the develop r&r faculty implementation um career development plans via the faculty liaisons policy 2022-2028 conduct focus groups within each faculty to assess the impact of r&r on individuals combine and assess all the results of the r&r evaluation initiatives and determine future actions review the possibility of signing the barcelona declaration on open research information submit proposal r&r of open science in case funding is awarded for proposal r&r of open science, review outcomes of the project for implementation within um open science and r&r policy initiate development of new um open science policy 2027-2031 to maintain open science as the norm within um base research assessment um regularly conducts participate in the national sep 2021- primarily on qualitative sep research assessments 2027 midterm review evaluation for which peer review that are embedded within is central, supported by the um quality assurance participate in the national discussion in responsible use of quantitative cycle. responsible use of the development of the new sep indicators quantitative indicators is 2027-2033 framework and ensure that supported by our the new guidelines continue to research intelligence integrate r&r philosophy team adapt internal research evaluation process to align with the new sep 2028-2034 consider the development of support on indicators for the education domain to be included in evidence-based cvs in addition to the research domain abandon inappropriate uses in these type of metrics are continue informing researchers on the research assessment of journal- no longer used in sep deficiencies of these metrics and and publication-based metrics, research assessments in particular inappropriate uses within um. our research continue exploring and developing of the journal impact factor intelligence team provides responsible alternatives. (jif) and h-index support on the use of responsible (alternative) metrics for researchers avoid the use of rankings of the sep research support and recognize the more than research organisations in assessment protocol our rank initiative research assessment dissuades benchmarking or rankings of adapt the um website to explain the organisations. um limitations of rankings together with other dutch universities have taken a explore the possibility together with critical stance towards other universities whether the data we international rankings and provide for the the and qs rankings promote more responsible can be made public alternatives determine whether um will actively participate (data provision) in alternative multi-dimensional rankings (initially focusing on u-multirank) appendix b: action plan timeline 2024 • participate in the national sep 2021-2027 midterm review • review the implementation of r&r related policies and guidelines within the um • review the implementation of the faculty and university-wide open science action plans • adapt the um website to explain the limitations of rankings • support and recognize the more than our rank initiative • explore the possibility together with other universities whether the data we provide for the the and qs rankings can be made public • determine whether um will actively participate (data provision) in alternative multi-dimensional rankings (initially focusing on u-multirank) • establish advisory board r&r • develop r&r faculty implementation plans via the faculty liaisons • conduct focus groups within each faculty to assess the impact of r&r on individuals • review the possibility of signing the barcelona declaration on open research information • submit proposal r&r of open science 2025 • combine and assess all the results of the r&r evaluation initiatives and determine future actions • consider the development of support on indicators for the education domain to be included in evidence-based cvs in addition to the research domain • in case funding is awarded for proposal r&r of open science, review outcomes of the project for implementation within um open science and r&r policy 2026 • initiate development of new um open science policy 2027-2031 to maintain open science as the norm within um 2027 • participate in the national discussion in the development of the new sep 2027- 2033 framework and ensure that the new guidelines continue to integrate r&r philosophy 2028 • adapt internal research evaluation process to align with the new sep 2028- 2034
