coara action plan 2023–2027 norwegian university of life sciences - nmbu about nmbu the mission of the norwegian university of life sciences is to contribute to the well-being of the planet. our interdisciplinary research and study programmes generate innovations in food, health, environmental protection, climate and sustainable use of natural resources. nmbu currently has approximately 7500 students and 2000 employees. coara and nor-cam based on the recommendations in the report nor-cam – a toolbox for recognition and rewards in academic careers from the universities norway (uhr), nmbu initiated in november 2022 an internal revision of the procedures for recruitment and promotion to academic positions at the university. nmbu signed the agreement on reforming research assessment in february 2023 and became member of coara. nmbu plans to implement the coara commitments primarily through implementing the recommendations of the nor-cam report in the recruitment and promotion of academic staff. action plan for implementation of coara commitments action period internal working group (wg) develops recommendations for implementing january-march nor-cam at the nmbu, for associate professors and professors, including a 2023 nmbu-competence assessment matrix. internal consultation process based on the wg recommendations involving may-august individual faculties, research and education standing committees, and 2023 unions. revised proposal for nmbu-competence assessment matrix and main november 2023 principles for use discussed in the research and education standing committees. approval by the university board of the nmbu competence assessment march 2024 matrix (nmbu-cam) and main principles for its use. revise administrative tools and regulations for recruitment and promotion july-september processes, including guidelines and templates. revise information and 2024 supporting documents for applicants. launch the nmbu competence assessment matrix for recruitment and september 2024 promotion to associate professor and professor-positions. contribute to revision of national academic field specific guidelines for 2024-2025 promotion to professor, where relevant. adjust the university career development support, competence building 2024-2025 activities, information and tools to the competence assessment matrix. consider implementing nmbu competence assessment matrix for other 2025 academic positions. sharing best practices with the national nor-cam network (now coara 2023-2027 national chapter)
