this item was submitted to loughborough's research repository by the author. items in figshare are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved, unless otherwise indicated. loughborough university coara action plan please cite the published version licence all rights reserved repository record university, loughborough, and elizabeth gadd. 2023. “loughborough university coara action plan”. loughborough university. https://doi.org/10.17028/rd.lboro.24260686.v1. loughborough university coara action plan version 1.1 october 2023 preamble loughborough university joined the coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) in february 2023. as a signatory to the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) that underpins the coalition, loughborough commits to sharing how we have started the process of reviewing and developing criteria, tools and processes in line with the core commitments according to an action plan with defined milestones, within one year of signing the agreement. loughborough university has a strong history of engagement with responsible research assessment (rra) and was one of the first universities in the uk to develop a responsible metrics policy back in 2016. to an extent, therefore, many of the commitments required by the arra are ‘business as usual’ for the institution. however, the university continuously strives to do better and to contribute nationally and internationally to this important agenda. our coara action plan therefore embeds existing rra practice at loughborough and outlines further actions to ensure we continually remain abreast of best practice and play a significant role in the promotion of rra globally. commitment scope action timeframe 1. , research in accordance with changes in assessment practices should enable 1.1 develop a new responsible research february 2023 recognition of the broad diversity of: assessment policy that makes explicit the the needs and nature of the research requirements of the arra. • valuable contributions that researchers make to science and for the benefit of society, including diverse outputs 1.2 work with shape disciplines to february 2023 purpose: this commitment will broaden recognition of beyond journal publications and irrespective of the develop guidance for the fair assessment the diverse practices, activities and careers in language in which they are communicated; of a broad range of practice- and non- research, considering the specific nature of research journal-article outputs which can be • practices that contribute to robustness, openness, applied to all disciplines. disciplines and other research endeavours. transparency, and the inclusiveness of research and the by october 2023 research process including: peer review, teamwork and 1.3 work to include new output guidance collaboration; in internal researcher assessment processes. • activities including teaching, leadership, supervision, training and mentoring. it is also important that copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 1 assessment facilitates the recognition and valorisation of diverse roles and careers in research, including: data 1.4 ensure a wider range of contributions by february 2024 steward, software engineer and data scientist roles, are also recognised as part of internal technical roles, public outreach, science diplomacy, researcher assessment processes. by february 2024 science advice and science communicator roles to name a few. 1.5 develop publication ethics guidance that requires researchers to credit all contributions to research outputs, possibly via the use of credit. it is recognised that current practice is often too narrow and limiting, so the goal cannot be to replace the narrow criteria we wish to move away from with different but equally narrow criteria. instead, the aim is to allow organisations to broaden the spectrum of what they value in research, while acknowledging that this may vary across disciplines and that each individual researcher should not be expected to contribute to all activities at once. 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative research assessment should rely primarily on qualitative 2.1 ensure peer review activity is listed as by june 2023 evaluation for which peer review is central, supported assessment for which peer review is central, supported by a scholarly activity on lupin by responsible use of quantitative indicators responsibly used quantitative indicators where appropriate. peer review is the most robust method 2.2 consider whether peer review activity known for assessing quality and has the advantage that it on lupin could be surfaced via pdr by december 2023 is in the hands of the research community. purpose: this commitment will enable the move 2.3 provide guidance on open peer review by december 2023 towards research assessment criteria that focus and peer review credit systems. primarily on quality, while recognising that responsible use of quantitative indicators can support assessment it is important that peer review processes are designed to 2.4 consider a university training offer on journal and/or output peer review by summer 2024 where meaningful and relevant, which is context meet the fundamental principles of rigor and dependent. transparency: expert assessment, transparency, impartiality, appropriateness, confidentiality, integrity and ethical considerations, gender, equality and diversity. see also: 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 to address the biases and imperfections to which any method is prone, the research community re-assesses and copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 2 improves peer review practices regularly. revised, or potentially new, criteria, tools and processes appropriate for assessing quality could be explored alongside peer review. moving towards assessment practices that rely more heavily on qualitative methods may require additional efforts from researchers. researchers should be recognised for these efforts and their contributions to reviewing peers’ work should be valued as part of their career progression. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based 3.1 update the training video for lu staff by easter 2024 of journal- and publication-based metrics, in particular metrics in research assessment should be abandoned. in on responsible research assessment and inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and particular, this means moving away from using metrics use of metrics, noting disciplinary h-index like the journal impact factor (jif), article influence score differences (ais) and h-index as proxies for quality and impact. ongoing ‘inappropriate uses’ include: 3.2 continue to monitor adherence to commitment loughborough university responsible purpose: this commitment will reduce the dominance • relying exclusively on author-based metrics (e.g. research assessment policy of a narrow set of quantitative journal and counting papers, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess publication-based metrics quality and/or impact; • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to see also: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 publication venue, format or language; • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact 4. avoid the use of rankings of research organisations recognising that the international rankings most often 4.1 promote loughborough's signatory by december 2024 in research assessment referred to by research organisations are currently not status to the inorms more than our ‘fair and responsible’ , the criteria these rankings use rank initiative alongside any ranking- should not trickle down to the evaluation of individual related promotion activity. researchers, research teams and research units. research purpose: this commitment will help avoid that metrics organisations should also be mindful that public 4.2 commit staff resource to promoting used by international rankings, which are more than our rank more globally. ongoing commitment communication (e.g. the active advertising of an inappropriate for assessing researchers, trickle down institution’s rank) can contribute to the perception that to research and researcher assessment. it will help the research quality conflates with ranking positions. where research community and research organisations regain copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 3 the autonomy to shape assessment practices, rather ranking approaches are deemed unavoidable, as may be than having to abide by criteria and methodologies set the case in forms of evaluation beyond the scope of this by external commercial companies. this could include agreement such as benchmarking and performance retaining control over ranking methodologies and reviews of countries or institutions, the methodological see also: 1.1 data. limitations of such approaches should be acknowledged, and institutions should avoid trickle-down effects on research and researcher assessment. 5. commit resources to reforming research resource allocation by assessment authorities and 5.1 create a new head of research ongoing commitment assessment as is needed to achieve the organisational research funding and performing organisations is a culture & assessment post with a specific changes committed to necessary condition for reforming assessment practices. remit to engage with national and resources should be allocated as is needed for each international rra policy agendas. organisation to achieve the changes that will enable adherence to the principles and to implement the 5.2 support for responsible research purpose: this commitment will ensure that assessment to form a specific aspect of ongoing commitment commitments. this includes resources to: organisations allocate the necessary resources, the research culture & quality manager's whether in the form of budget or staff capacity, to • implement changes in research assessment, including job description. hours may vary over the improve research assessment practices within their planning and progress monitoring; year. agreed timeframe. • raise awareness among all actors; • educate, train and support researchers and any other staff involved in assessment, including peer-reviewers and assessors; and • support the necessary infrastructure such as tools and services for the transparent collection and processing of data on research assessment practices. particular attention should be paid to making resources available to enable the engagement of researchers at all career stages in reforming research assessment. 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, scope: criteria for the assessment of research performing 6.1 continue to 'evaluate with the ongoing commitment tools and processes units and organisations, including universities, research evaluated’ in accordance with lu rra centres, and research infrastructures, should be reviewed policy: "wherever possible, research and adapted, and new criteria developed where needed, assessments will be designed and copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 4 based on evidence. this should be done in close interpreted with the communities under 6.1 criteria for units and institutions with the collaboration with assessors and those that will be evaluation. in particular, we will ensure direct involvement of research organisations and assessed, including research organisations and that those evaluated will be able to verify researchers at all career stages, review and develop researchers. the changes should increase the ability to any analysis and underlying data that criteria for assessing research units and research assess quality by enabling recognition of all contributions relates to them." performing organisations, while promoting to quality research by research units and institutions. interoperability such recognition includes that of early sharing of data and results, open collaboration, teamwork; and consideration of contributions to the research ecosystem, knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, purpose: this commitment will ensure that national / cultural and societal impact. national / regional / regional / organisational authorities and evaluation organisational authorities and evaluation agencies should agencies review and, where needed, develop criteria coordinate to ensure their methodologies and processes for the assessment of research performing units and are interoperable, while simultaneously respecting the organisations, in accordance with the principles. it will necessary adaptation to each context. foster the responsible use of metrics in assessing research performing units and organisations, and help to prevent contradictions or incompatibilities between the assessment of research, researchers and research performing organisations. it will also safeguard the interoperability of adapted or newly developed assessment processes. 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, scope: criteria, tools and processes should be reviewed 6.2 continue to monitor and review ongoing commitment tools and processes and developed together with researchers in different internal promotion, probation, appraisal disciplines and at different career stages; and should criteria to ensure they meet our internal enable recognition of the diversity of research activities rra policy which takes in the arra. and practices that contribute to research quality, 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers with including diverse outputs in different languages. this the direct involvement of researchers at all career should increase the ability to assess quality by enabling stages, review and develop criteria, tools and recognition of all contributions to quality research from see also 6.1 and 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 processes for the assessment of research projects, research projects and by researchers and research teams. research teams and researchers that are adapted to this includes recognition of early sharing of data and their context of application results, open collaboration, and teamwork. reformed practices for assessing individual researchers should consider future potential alongside track record and take into account researchers’ individual contexts and careers. copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 5 they should also recognise that researchers cannot excel purpose: this commitment will enable recognition of in all types of tasks and provide for a framework that the diverse research activities and practices through allows researchers to contribute to the definition of their the revision and development of assessment criteria, research goals and aspirations. research assessment by tools, and processes. it will ensure that organisations research funders should consider disciplinary, multi-, review their processes and make tangible changes by inter-, and trans-disciplinary research as well as developing existing or new assessment approaches, contributions to knowledge generation and scientific, individually or in collaboration with others, in technological, economic, cultural and societal impact accordance with the principles 7. and scope: without widespread awareness of the reform and 7.1 incorporate research assessment by easter 2024 provide transparent communication, guidance, and training of those assessed and, crucially, assessors, reform as a key pillar of ongoing work on training on assessment criteria and processes as well progress will be slow - if not impossible. organisations research & innovation culture at as their use should be clear and transparent about assessment loughborough university. processes and the tools and criteria they use. they should make guidance on their assessment approaches openly 7.2 head of research culture research available and train those involved in the assessment quality & culture manager to seek purpose: this commitment will ensure that process. they should allow those assessed to have access opportunities to write, speak and advise organisations raise awareness of the reform among all to the criteria, data and reviews or deliberation outcomes on rra in national & international fora. actors. it will ensure that organisations transparently used in their assessment within the limits of ongoing commitment communicate the criteria, tools and processes used for confidentiality. particular attention should be paid to once appointed. research assessment and train researchers and raising awareness among researchers at all career stages. assessors in their use. 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable scope: while respecting each other’s autonomy, 8.1 explore the possibility of establishing by easter 2024 mutual learning within and beyond the coalition organisations should share practices and experiences to and joining a national chapter of coara purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations facilitate mutual learning. this exchange should include in the uk. exchange and make use of information for mutual contributing to the development of guidance and learning. it will help avoid fragmentation, contribute common approaches in order to minimise contradictions 8.2 play an active role in at least one to the coherence of assessment practices between or incompatibilities between the assessment practices coara working group. from autumn 2023 organisations, and enable researcher mobility. it also used by different organisations. it should also include will allow those further ahead to share approaches sharing of lessons learned to ensure continuous mutual and lessons learned, to benefit those who have further improvements to go on their reform journey. copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 6 9. communicate progress made on adherence to the scope: demonstrating progress made towards 9.1 publish our coara action plan on the autumn 2023 principles and implementation of the commitments implementing the commitments and adherence to the lu rra web pages once approved. principles is an important part of this initiative. organisations should commit to regularly update each 9.2 annually report back on progress via other and their communities on their adherence and the action plan and update it as purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations progress. this process involves being open to scrutiny necessary. update one another on the progress made. it will autumn 2024 and from their own communities, sharing successes as well as foster careful self-reflection and monitoring of their ongoing challenges, and communicating their experiences to own adherence to the principles and progress towards facilitate collective progress. meeting the commitments. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid scope: growing evidence shows that current assessment 10.1 head of research culture & ongoing evidence and the state-of-the-art in research on processes that rely on publication and journal-based assessment & research culture & quality commitment. research, and make data openly available for evidence metrics are prone to multiple biases. as approaches using manager to remain abreast of latest gathering and research more qualitative research assessment are piloted by evidence and best practice in rra. several organisations (e.g. narrative and evidence-based cvs, new assessment frameworks and indicators), it is important to evaluate and monitor their impact based on purpose: this commitment will ensure that evidence and rigorous methods. organisations should assessment approach decisions are evidence contribute to the evidence base on research assessment informed. it will help organisations reflect on their in order to make this possible. for example, it could be own processes, gain understanding about whether achieved by making data that can be used for research on assessment practices achieve the desired goals and research available, by participating in research on engage in evolutive assessment based on new research, or by funding research on research. data evidence as it becomes available. it will also help to sharing should be the minimum commitment and data ensure control and ownership of research assessment should be shared through open infrastructure, while data by the research community. respecting personal data protection. dr elizabeth gadd, july 2023 copyright © loughborough university. all rights reserved. 7
