reforming research assessment at idibaps: action plan 2024 - 2028 research foundation clínic barcelona-idibaps 1. introduction the fundació de recerca clínic barcelona-institut d'investigacions biomèdiques august pi i sunyer (idibaps) is a biomedical research institute of excellence. it combines clinical, translational and basic research to accelerate the translation of knowledge to the benefit of patients. idibaps is a nonprofit foundation with a board of governors representing the catalan government’s departments of health and of research and universities, the clínic barcelona hospital, and the university of barcelona. the idibaps research community is composed of more than 2,000 professionals and includes 98 research groups distributed across 5 different areas of knowledge and 5 multidisciplinary research programs. in the recent years prior committing to the reform, idibaps has progressively adapted some of the assessment processes and criteria in the institutional evaluation schemes. progress is ongoing and further changes can still be implemented in most of the institution’s assessment schemes, now benefiting from the structure and timeframe that the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) and the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) require. generally, assessment processes at idibaps can be classified in two categories: those part of internal calls or processes, and those related to external calls. whereas the first are entirely designed and executed institutionally, and thus eligible to be thoroughly reformed, external assessment processes commonly consist in a prioritization of candidacies requested by research funders. research assessment at idibaps is managed by the scientific coordination office (sco) under the supervision of the strategy director (sd), and ultimately the idibaps director. • internal assessment schemes include evaluations of individual researchers at different stages of their career (e.g., promotion to junior group leader, renewal of group leader position) or evaluations of research groups, among others. importantly, the large number of researchers and research groups at idibaps poses a challenge in evaluation processes targeting the whole community, such as the quinquennial evaluation of research groups, so does their heterogeneity in disciplines and profiles. • in the prioritization of candidacies for external funders, two main factors limit the adoption of arra commitments: firstly, the requested documentation and applied criteria need to align with those established by the funders’ call and, secondly, the assessment process needs to be feasible within the timeframe provided by funders, often too limited to accommodate a peer-review process. this situation evidences the importance of envisioning the research assessment reform as a collective effort by all actors in the local, national and international research system and the need for aligned criteria and indicators. tackling these challenges will be key to successfully implement a research assessment reform at idibaps, for which feasibility, prioritization, and flexibility in accordance with the pace that reforming assessment implies will become guiding principles. these will add to the key principles of inclusiveness, diversity, collaboration and sustainability in a process aiming to embed quality- focused assessment in idibaps’ institutional culture while contributing to reforming research assessment beyond. 1|page 2. action plan 2024 – 2028 arra goal actions actors commitments a) aligning institutional evaluation practices to arra commitments • create a wg: researchers from all 1) involving all career stages, research areas and sco relevant actors in the profiles + sd + sco. 6 sd institutional rar • introduce wg members to the rar wg and arra. • evaluate the capacity and feasibility to change institutional assessment 2) reviewing current processes (internal and external). research assessment • select and prioritize assessment wg practices; discussing 1-3; 6 processes to be reformed. sco and developing new • discuss and propose concrete ones actions to change and restructure assessment processes. • design and plan the rar implementation. • commit resources to coordinate the 3) planning, piloting implementation. sco and implementing the 1-3; 5 • pilot the proposed reform in sd proposed rar different evaluation processes and cohorts. • fully implement the rar. • evaluate aspects of the implemented reform: execution, 4) evaluating the new sco outcomes, views of actors involved. assessment practices; 10 sd • analyse and integrate evaluation collecting feedback wg results and feedback to the reform process. b) fostering an institutional cultural change in research assessment • communicate the rar and progress in its implementation to the sco 1) awareness raising research community. commu- 7; 9 and dissemination • train the research community on nications new research assessment office practices. • integrate the rar in other 2) integrating the rar institutional policies (e.g., open into institutional sco science, research career, etc). - policies and sd • integrate the rar in the institutional regulations strategic plan 2025-2028. 2|page c) participating and contributing to the rar locally, nationally and internationally • participate in coara wgs (e.g., 1) participating in saga wg). 8; 9 sco coara’s wgs • participate in national chapter spain. • share the institutional progress 2) external towards the rar. dissemination and 7-10 sco • participate in exchange exchange opportunities with external actors. arra: agreement on reforming research assessment; rar: research assessment reform; sco: scientific coordination office; sd: strategy director; wg: working group. 2.1 timeline for action plan implementation idibaps became an arra signatory and coara member in october 2022, and actions towards the institutional reform of research assessment started immediately afterwards (2023). year 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 goal 1 2 a 3 4 1 b 2 1 c 2 for any further information, please contact: scientific coordination office idibaps coordinacio.cientifica@recerca.clinic.cat this work is licensed under a creative commons attribution share alike 4.0 international. 3|page
