dff coara action plan 2024-2027 introduction independent research fund denmark (dff) signed the agreement on reform- the plan outlines initiatives that will be developed into concrete deliverables ing research assessment (arra) and joined the coalition on reforming re- over the course of the project period. the action plan will ensure that dff takes search assessment (coara) to ensure that our evaluation practices reflect the concrete steps to contribute to ensuring that the assessment of research, re- diverse contributions of researchers, thereby fostering a more inclusive and searchers and research organisations recognises the diverse outputs, prac- impactful research environment. by joining this global coalition, we are dedi- tices and activities that maximise the quality and impact of research. cated to advancing assessment practices that improve qualitative assessment practices and promote the responsible use of metrics, enhancing the integrity would you like to follow our implementation process? we will provide updates and quality of danish research. on our initiatives along the way through the general dff newsletter (in danish) and on our website. the agreement sets a shared direction for changes in assessment practices for research, researchers and research performing organisations, with the over- page 2 contains a visual, tentative timeline of the dff initiatives. deliveries will arching goal to maximise the quality and impact of research. the agreement be specified gradually, considering dependencies and best practices from includes principles and four ‘core commitments’ as well as six ‘supporting other organisations. page 3-5 gives an overview of the work packages' and commitments’ for reforms. overarching initiatives' general objectives and tentative deliverables. the dff coara action plan 2024-2027 consists of seven work packages and three overarching initiatives designed to ensure the alignment of dff with the coara commitments. do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 1 coara action plan initiatives work package objective commitment wp1: danish coara network a danish coara network for knowledge sharing supporting commitment 8 wp2: cv template new cv format core commitment 1 wp3: publication list new publication list format core commitment 1,2 wp4: quantitative indicators analysis and definition of appropriate use of quantitative indicators core commitment 2,3 core commitment 1, 2, 3, 4 wp5: assessment procedures adjusting the fund's evaluation processes supporting commitment 6 wp6: training training the fund's assessors and administration supporting commitment 5, 7 wp7: transparency ensuring transparency in the assessment process supporting commitment 7, 10 overarching initiative a involvement of researchers/applicants supporting commitment 6 overarching initiative b communication supporting commitment 8, 9 overarching initiative c evaluation supporting commitment 10 timeline wp7: transparency wp6: training wp5: assessment procedures wp3: publication list wp2: cv template wp4: quantitative indicators wp1: danish coara network overarching initiatives a: involvement of applications b: communications c: evaluation q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 2024 2025 2026 2027 do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 2 coara commitments core commitment 1 supporting commitment 6 , research . in accordance with the needs and nature of the research. supporting commitment 7 core commitment 2 and provide transparent for which communication, guidance, and training on assessment criteria and peer review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators. processes as well as their use. core commitment 3 supporting commitment 8 abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal- and exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and publication based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of journal beyond the coalition. impact factor (jif) and h-index. supporting commitment 9 core commitment 4 communicate progress made on adherence to the principles and . implementation of the commitments. supporting commitment 5 supporting commitment 10 as is needed to evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the achieve the organisational changes committed to. state-of-the-art in research on research, . do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 3 work package 1: tentative deliverable(s) work package 4: danish coara network (new) cv template. if possible, fully or partially quantitative indicators objective(s) aligned with other funds’ templates. objective(s) dff wants to contribute to establishing a danish one of the key elements of the agreement is that coara network for knowledge sharing among relevant coara commitment(s) the use of quantitative indicators as a direct meas- danish institutions that have signed the agree- core commitment 1: recognise the diversity of con- ure of quality and impact should be restricted. dff ment, if possible a national chapter. the network tributions to, and careers in, research in accord- has already banned the use of journal impact can facilitate the exchange of best practises, and, ance with the needs and nature of the research. factor. the work package will analyse the fund’s possibly, some degree of alignment to the benefit use of quantitative indicators, particularly the h- of the research community. index, and arrive a definition of how dff under- stands ‘inappropriate’ and ‘appropriate’ uses. this tentative deliverable(s) will be integrated into the fund’s assessment pro- establishment of a network in cooperation with work package 3: cedures. other danish signees, and arrangements for keeping publication list it running for as long as relevant. objective(s) tentative deliverable(s) a new format for publication lists aims to ensure dff guidelines or policy for appropriate and inap- relevant coara commitment(s) that it's not quantity but quality and relevance that propriate uses of quantitative indicators, particu- supporting commitment 8: exchange practices matters when an applicant's profile is assessed. it larly the h-index. and experiences to enable mutual learning within should also provide researchers, including younger and beyond the coalition. ones, with a better opportunity to showcase their relevant coara commitment(s) research profile, describe its impact, and highlight core commitment 2: base research assessment research relevant to the project. primarily on qualitative evaluation for which peer review is central, supported by responsible use of tentative deliverable(s) quantitative indicators & core commitment 3: work package 2: a new format for publication lists. if possible, fully abandon inappropriate uses in research assess- cv template or partially aligned with other funds’ templates. ment of journal- and publication based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of journal impact objective(s) relevant coara commitment(s) factor (jif) and h-index. the work package will result in a template for a core commitment 1: recognise the diversity of con- new cv format designed to recognise a broader tributions to, and careers in, research in accord- range of research activities and outputs. a new cv ance with the needs and nature of the research & format aims to facilitate the recognition of the core commitment 3: abandon inappropriate uses diverse roles and careers in research and research in research assessment of journal- and publication- projects. based metrics, . do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 4 work package 5: work package 6: work package 7: adjustment of assessment training of assessors and transparency procedures and tools administration objective(s) objective(s) objective(s) dff plays a significant role in the danish research a central element of the agreement is that the sig- the work package will ensure both general capac- funding landscape as one of the primary sources natories reassess and improve peer review prac- ity building in terms of quality assurance of as- of funding for ideas originating from researchers' tices regularly. the purpose of the work package sessment practices, with a special focus on diver- own initiatives. as a public fund, part of the public is to evaluate and develop the fund's evaluation sity in research, and the use of qualitative administration, dff has a particular obligation to processes in alignment with the agreement. indicators. in addition, the work package supports be transparent and open regarding its activities the implementation of the plan's deliverables by and internal decision-making processes. tentative deliverable(s) offering training sessions on an ongoing basis. revised evaluation criteria; revised requirements tentative deliverable(s) for project descriptions, and revised reviewer tentative deliverable(s) dff transparency policy and a plan for release of forms and processes. training programs for fund members, external re- i.e. internal process guidelines and tools. viewers and administrative personnel. relevant coara commitment(s) relevant coara commitment(s) core commitment 1: recognise the diversity of con- relevant coara commitment(s) supporting commitment 7: raise awareness of re- tributions to, and careers in, research in accord- supporting commitment 5: commit resources to search assessment reform and provide transparent ance with the needs and nature of the research & reforming research assessment as is needed to communication, guidance, and training on assess- core commitment 2: base research assessment achieve the organisational changes committed to ment criteria and processes as well as their use & primarily on qualitative evaluation for which peer & supporting commitment 7: raise awareness of supporting commitment 10: evaluate practices, review is central, supported by responsible use of research assessment reform and provide transpar- criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the quantitative indicators & core commitment 3: ent communication, guidance, and training on as- state-of-the-art in research on research, and make abandon inappropriate uses in research assess- sessment criteria and processes as well as their data openly available for evidence gathering and ment of journal and publication based metrics, in use. research. particular inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h-index & core commitment 4: & supporting commitment 6: review and develop research assessment crite- ria, tools and processes. do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 5 overarching initiative a: overarching initiative b: overarching initiative c: involvement of researchers/applicants communication evaluation objective(s) objective(s) objective(s) this initiative aims to ensure that the fund engages the agreement obliges the fund to continuously as part of the agreement, dff has committed to applicants (and possibly other stakeholders) in the communicate about the work on arra. there will monitoring whether the initiatives launched implementation of the agreement, and generally be ongoing coordination of communication ef- achieve their goals. therefore, dff will collect speaking. the initiative will identify various tools forts, both at the overall level and tied to the indi- qualitative and quantitative data so that the effects and initiatives for applicant involvement where rel- vidual work packages. of the initiated initiatives can be monitored and evant, in coordination with the work packages. evaluated. relevant coara commitment(s) relevant coara commitment(s) supporting commitment 8: exchange practices relevant coara commitment(s) supporting commitment 6.2: with the direct in- and experiences to enable mutual learning within supporting commitment 10: evaluate practices, volvement of researchers at all career stages, and beyond the coalition & supporting commit- criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the review and develop criteria, tools and processes for ment 9: communicate progress made on adher- state-of-the-art in research on research, and make the assessment of research projects, research ence to the principles and implementation of the data openly available for evidence gathering and teams and researchers that are adapted to their commitments. research. context of application & supporting commitment 8: . do you have a question, or want to reach out regarding our coara/arra initiatives? contact us at arra@ufm.dk. page 6
