coara action plan – tu/e introduction the tu/e core values are the guiding principles for the tu/e action plan. as tu/e community, we embrace and live our four core values: curious, open, respectful and responsible. curious: we cherish curiosity, driving us to explore, question, and innovate, encouraging continuous learning and discovery. open: we value an open accessible culture and are transparent and trustworthy about our actions. respectful: we care for each other, treat everyone with respect, and welcome people from diverse backgrounds. responsible: we shape the future, led by example, and make a positive impact on society and sustainable innovation. how are the university values translated into the tu/e action plan? built on the values, tu/e’s strategy 2030 states that the university is a human-centered employer, providing opportunities for talent for personal development and engaging the challenges of tomorrow together. in late 2019, the dutch public knowledge institutes and research funders published the position paper ‘room for everyone's talent: towards a new balance in the recognition and rewards of academics’, arguing that the system of recognizing and rewarding academics needs modernization. for many years, research performance has determined the career path of academics, but this dominance is increasingly starting to crack. after all, education and impact are also determinants of the success of a modern knowledge institute. new developments related to open access and open science also place different demands on today’s academics. in addition, the tackling of complex academic and societal issues requires greater collaboration between academics, which in turn requires different skills. tu/e is an active member of the national recognition & rewards (r&r) community. in the period 2020-2022 a task force consisting of junior, mid-career, and senior scientific staff and hr worked on a tu/e vision that is the starting point for the new academic staff personnel policy. six leading principles for recognizing and rewarding excellence have been formulated: principle 1. trust, support and appreciation tu/e supports and enables faculty to develop their personal ambitions and objectives within the core domains and in compliance with the strategic objectives of the university. tu/e appreciates diversity in these ambitions and values the professional contributions made to the community. this requires a culture of trust, dedicated coaching and mentoring, and a forward-looking approach while setting realistic objectives. these ambitions may change at different stages of a career. principle 2. core competences faculty is active in both education and research. during the tenure track at the level of ud2, priority is given to research and education. starting at the level of ud1, faculty may choose an emphasis on specific domains. this emphasis needs to be agreed upon with the team/group/department. principle 3. balance between individual and the collective, and academic citizenship staff will be recognized for their contribution to their team(s) and their collegiality. next to team spirit, academic citizenship is crucial to create a thriving academic community. a team is a powerful entity to achieve excellence. the composition of a team allows individuals to develop their talents (career diversification), while collectively meeting the objectives of the department and university. principle 4. open science engagement with open science will be stimulated and recognized and integrated in academic assessments. principle 5. high-quality academic leadership high-quality leadership is dedicated to creating an inclusive, safe and trusting working environment in which individuals can thrive and collectively meet shared objectives. our leaders embody our core values. principle 6. fair and individual assessment based on an agreed upon profile assessment is based on an agreed upon profile and objectives, and a combination of narratives of past achievements and future visions, supported by demonstratable products and quantitative data tailored to the profile and discipline of the individual. these six principles are the linking pin to the coara agreement and its commitments. goals and actions in 2023, the roadmap ‘room for everyone’s talent in practice’ was published. it outlines what the national r&r community aims to achieve on the five r&r priorities in the years ahead: 1. diversification and vitalization of career paths 2. achieving balance between individuals and the collective 3. focusing on quality 4. stimulating all aspects of open science 5. encouraging academic leadership for tu/e, this leads to the actions as mentioned in the table below: actions recognition & rewards tu/e culture barometer, may 2024 result: full report program: overall the culture barometer is a national survey to gain insight into the recognition of r&r coordination ambitions and culture change by academics. it reveals tu/e’s positive encouragement to diversify career paths and a focus on quality over quantity. the culture barometer will be repeated in 2026. diversification and academic career paths policy in 2024 and 2025 tu/e will further develop the academic career paths policy to diversify vitalization of career development matrix career paths and provide transparent quality indicators in the development matrix. paths everyone professor, november 2024 the career policy everyone professor aims to further equality and recognition of teacher career paths, november 2024 academic staff by granting assistant and associate professors the right to wear a toga, use the title ‘professor’ and grant the ius promovendi when they meet qualitative conditions. tu/e has developed teacher career paths to provide a framework for appointment and career opportunities for teachers. achieving balance stimulate teamwork and create high- in 2026 tu/e will develop strategic workforce planning for its departments. between individuals and performing teams the collective strategic workforce planning focusing on quality biographical sketch cv, march 2024 the biographical sketch is a template for an evidence-based cv for candidates performance and development cycle preparing for assessments to substantiate their case. teacher professionalization tu/e is redesigning its procedures for annual dialogue with the aim to become more development and future-oriented. the assessment procedures will be redesigned to increase transparency for all parties involved, and to increase the quality of academic assessment for promotions. teacher professionalization starts with a university teaching qualification. however, tu/e will start continuous professional development for teachers in 2025. stimulating all aspects open science agenda tu/e will develop a database of best practices for open science activities and an of open science intervention for assessment committees in 2025. encouraging academic academic leadership development tu/e has given leadership a more prominent place in academic assessment. leadership r&r toolbox/knowledge platform (e.g., open science training, inclusive assessment and selection, podcasts, journal articles, etc.) exchange of best practices timeframe the tu/e action plan is valid until 2027. action plan 2024 – 2027 - tu/e analysis of 10 coara commitments commitment in the agreement on state of play at tu/e in december 2023 objectives and actions 2024-2027 reforming research assessment 1 recognize the diversity of contributions to, in tu/e, recognition & rewards has mainly academic career paths allow assistant professors and careers in, research in accordance with focused on developing more diverse academic (ud2) to focus on education and research. the the needs and nature of the research career paths. assessment for promotion will be based on these two domains. the policy for teacher career paths was academic careers will become more dynamic. developed to be implemented in 2024. academics can build a career with a focus on education, research, and impact, leading to more diversity in academic profiles. the position of teachers is valued and strengthened. their possibilities for development and growth are supported and broadened. leadership will be a prerequisite for promotion in all career phases. 2 base research assessment primarily on at the institutional and department level, tu/e academic assessment will be redesigned to create a qualitative evaluation for which peer uses the strategy evaluation protocol (sep). it uniform way of working. a uniform process is a review is central, supported by responsible provides a structured approach to assess the prerequisite to improve quality and create use of quantitative indicators quality, relevance, and viability of research at transparency. all departments agree to ground rules dutch universities and institutes every six years. for a compliant framework to ensure clarity and an assessment committee of academic peers uniformity and make their way of working available in independent experts assesses the performance of the university. core members and fixed chairs are the unit based on the self-evaluation and a site appointed to increase the quality of academic visit. assessments. tu/e has conducted a pilot in 2 research for each domain and each function level of departments with an evidence-based narrative cv assistant, associate, and full professors, there will be with the aim to focus on qualitative evaluation. a set of main quality features / a description of the expected output or behavior. the biographical sketch was introduced in all departments in march 2024 as an evidence-based narrative cv. candidates will use the biographical sketch to substantiate their case for promotion. 3 abandon inappropriate uses in research tu/e has developed an open science white paper tu/e aims to create a database of best open science assessment of journal- and publication to set the tu/e open science agenda. based on practices for academics, which will be updated based metrics, in particular, inappropriate the (inter)national agenda, open science themes periodically, to describe their activities and shape uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- of relevance for tu/e are: open access publishing; their ambitions. although practices such as open index open and fair data; open education; and data, code, material, publications, preregistration, collaboration with external partners (societal clear conflict of interest, and the author credit role engagement, industry). are commonly known, they are not widely used by candidates to support their promotion documents. tu/e is compliant with the open access the inventory of best practices aims to establish publishing platform ore. open science initiatives examples of indicators of open science activities and of tu/e can be found here. how to use them as evidence in the biographical sketch. tu/e discourages the use of metrics, such as h- index and jif in the assessment of individual academics and requires strict compliance with the overall principles of professional scientific conduct in all cases. 4 avoid the use of rankings of research the use of rankings and especially the use of a national discussion between dutch universities is organisations in research assessment league tables is under discussion at the executive taking place about the use of rankings. the proposal level. in individual assessment, rankings of for concrete action is being discussed. tu/e supports research organizations are not used. the development of alternatives to league tables. 5 commit resources, whether in the form of in 2017, tu/e established the interdepartmental the hrm squad program has committed resources budget or staff capacity, to reforming committees to further the quality of the academic and set priorities for several projects on career and research assessment as is needed to performance and personal development performance, and academic leadership. the top achieve the organisational changes. evaluation and feedback at our university. its priorities for career & performance for the upcoming members are senior academics. it is the ambition years are academic career paths, redesigning to increase the transparency and robustness of academic assessment procedures, developing our evaluation methods and criteria, with specific annual dialogues, and developing strategic attention to diversity and scientific domain workforce planning. these projects will be developed characteristics. the members of the in co-creation with academic staff members. the interdepartmental committees develop mutual, academic leadership will further develop the in-depth insights and expertise regarding leadership vision and strategy and connect the evaluating, assessing, and guiding academic leadership programs to the tu/e values. talent. tu eindhoven young academy of engineering (eyae) is a network of early career scientists, designers and engineers. the eyae are a platform for young academics for open discussion; provide support for early career researchers at tu/e; foster interdisciplinary cooperation and research, excellence in education, contribute to valorization (knowledge transfer) and outreach, and advise on policies regarding scientific research, education, valorization, outreach, and impact both inside and outside tu/e. 6 review and develop research assessment the strategy evaluation protocol (sep) is a flexible the current sep protocol is valid from 2021 to 2027. criteria, tools and processes instrument that is at the service of a productive it is reviewed each six years by an expert group of conversation on the quality and societal relevance dutch academics. tu/e is represented in this expert of the research and the viability of research units group. in light of their own aims and strategy. the protocol leaves room for plurality with respect to in 2025, the academic career paths will be further the application and interpretation of the different developed. a final version of the development matrix elements, depending e.g., on the institutional will be designed to ensure dynamic career paths and context, the research discipline and the unit's align with the biographical sketch. nature. strategic workforce planning will be implemented. in researchers are assessed regularly by a midterm this plan, departments describe the talents they advisory committee and a promotion assessment need in order to realise their vision and mission. committee. these committees advise the diversification is key in this respect. department boards and provide recommendations to the researchers. a first draft of a development matrix was developed to diversify academic careers and put focus on quality instead of quantity. 7 raise awareness of research assessment research assessment reform is discussed tu/e will create interventions for assessment reform and provide transparent regularly at the doctorate board (executive board committees to broaden the scope of diverse communication, guidance, and training on with deans). furthermore, it is discussed at the academic career paths. increasing assessors’ assessment criteria and processes as well meetings of the interdepartmental committees. knowledge of diverse career paths and open science as their use new committee members participate in the activities aims to foster an understanding of open course inclusive selection and assessment. science activities as well as an equal value of diverse assessment criteria and processes are published career paths and the different domains. the on the tu/e intranet pages. intervention will be mandatory for core members of new developments are communicated to other academic assessment. stakeholders, such as the research support network and the project development officers. 8 exchange practices and experiences to the r&r project leaders of all universities meet on dutch universities intend to create a dutch chapter enable mutual learning within and beyond a regular basis and exchange good practices. the in coara. this will allow all dutch coara contact the coalition annual r&r festival is open to a broader persons to connect, exchange good practices, and community. the rrview platform has been provide the national recognition & rewards program created to share knowledge and exchange an international dimension. experiences within the r&r community. 9 communicate progress made on the action plan will be published publicly. internal communication will be enhanced by creating adherence to the principles and intranet pages on coara and the implementation of implementation of the commitments the commitments. 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools based the state-of-the-art in research on research is evaluation of our practices, criteria and tools will on solid evidence and the state-of-the-art shared on a national level within the recognition & take place in the hrm squad program with a pdca in research on research, and make data rewards network. (plan do check act) cycle for continuous openly available for evidence gathering and the business intelligence portal provides data on improvement. research the progress within tu/e and is available to all employees and students.
