university of jyväskylä 2.5.2024 p.o.box 35 fi-40014 jyväskylän yliopisto reforming research assessment university of jyväskylä´s commitment to implement the european agreement on reforming research assessment – action plan 2024-2027 the principles of responsible researcher assessment are central to jyu's strategy and documented policies, but they are underpinned by a number of national and international principles and initiatives that guide responsible assessment and to which the university is committed. based on these principles, the jyu principles for responsible researcher assessment have been formulated, which are: • openness: assessments should aim at maximum transparency. • equality and non-discrimination of researchers are taken into account in assessment. • flexibility: assessment recognises the special characteristics and culture of different disciplines. • competence: assessment is based on impartiality and reliable information. • diversity: qualitative assessment, peer assessment, and responsible quantitative indicators support well-rounded assessment of researchers’ activities and merits. as part of its dedication to supporting and implementing responsible research evaluation principles, university of jyväskylä formally endorsed the european agreement on reforming research assessment in 2022. in its effort to fulfill the commitments outlined in this agreement, university of jyväskylä has developed an action plan to guide its forthcoming activities in the domain of research assessment. university of jyväskylä´s responsible assessment steering group approved the gap-analysis and action plan on april 22nd 2024. seminaarinkatu 15 tel +358 14 260 1211 for jyu. since 1863. po box 35, fi-40014 vat number: fi02458947 jyu.fi university of jyväskylä 1/ 5 finland gap-analysis university of jyväskylä gap-analysis university of jyväskylä commitment in the agreement on reforming research assessment situation at university of jyväskylä in march 2024 objectives and actions 2024-2027 1 , research in accordance embedded in the university’s jyu principles for responsible researcher assessment university of jyväskylä is partly meeting this with the needs and nature of the research commitment. https://uno.jyu.fi/en/current/archive/2024/01/university-of-jyvaskyla-invests-in-fair-assessment-of- researchers-2013-jyu-principles-for-responsible-researcher-assessment-approved objective: further actions will be developed in this - implemented in the jyu tenure track career model and evaluation policy for professors (2019) regard in the period 2024-2027. https://www.jyu.fi/en/research/tenure-track-at-the-university-of-jyvaskyla - implemented in the evaluation procedures organized by the human resources action: reviewing and streamlining evaluation processes. - to be integrated in the career frameworks for other academic staff (2024) https://uno.jyu.fi/en/hr- handbook/forms-of-employment/jyus-different-forms-of-employment-and-members-of-the-work-community - wp 1. 2024: evaluate current assessment practices in terms of alignment with the principles and - additional activities and policies to support researchers in their different roles (e.g., leadership training for young commitments re-evaluate researchers, jyu lead etc.) - in addition to academic citation databases, jyu has also acquired access to citation data in policy documents (overton -database) . 2 for which peer review is embedded in the university’s jyu principles for responsible researcher assessment objective: responsible use of quantitative indicators: central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators make use of peer review efficient; reducing workload of https://uno.jyu.fi/en/current/archive/2024/01/university-of-jyvaskyla-invests-in-fair-assessment-of- academic staff and evaluators researchers-2013-jyu-principles-for-responsible-researcher-assessment-approved action: updating guidelines and information for evaluators action: updating calls for applications responsible use of quantitative indicators - wp 2. 2024 - 2026: develop existing and design new assessment criteria, tools, and processes with assessors -existing guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors in the evaluation of research and those that are assessed https://openscience.jyu.fi/en/responsible-publication-metrics online solution jyucite made available for all to get time- and research-question –normalized academic citation impact metrics on most article publications. 3 abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal- and publication- embedded in the university’s jyu principles for responsible researcher assessment objective: make responsible use of quantitative based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- indicators index (as proxies for quality and impact) https://uno.jyu.fi/en/current/archive/2024/01/university-of-jyvaskyla-invests-in-fair-assessment-of- researchers-2013-jyu-principles-for-responsible-researcher-assessment-approved action: updating the guidelines for the use of ‘inappropriate uses’ include: quantitative indicators • relying exclusively on author-based metrics (e.g. counting papers, patents, citations, - wp 2. 2024 - 2026: develop existing and design new grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; existing guidelines for the use of quantitative indictors in the evaluation of research assessment criteria, tools, and processes with assessors and those that are assessed • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, format or https://openscience.jyu.fi/en/responsible-publication-metrics language; action: implementing the updated guidelines (faculties and units) • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact. - signatory of san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) - wp 3. 2025 - 2026: implement developed and new - implemented in recruitment procedures, evaluations organized by the hr etc. assessment criteria, tools, and processes according to the principles action: implementing the principles of responsible use - journal names, placing in journal rankings, h-index, and jufo-rankings are explicitly excluded from research of quantitative indicators into the job and grant 2 analytics results created for researcher assessment purposes. the rationale for these exclusions is also displayed application forms for end users of analytics results. - wp 3. 2025 - 2026: implement developed and new assessment criteria, tools, and processes according to the principles action: integrating the principles of responsible use of quantitative indicators into the guidelines for evaluators - wp 2. 2024 - 2026: develop existing and design new assessment criteria, tools, and processes with assessors and those that are assessed action: create and streamline process firewall designs to enable the abandonment of inappropriate assessment paradigms. 4 - university of jyväskylä already adopts a critical stance towards rankings since the 2023 research assessment university of jyväskylä is already substantially meeting this commitment. no additional actions will be - rankings are not used in research(er) assessment developed in this regard in the period 2024-2027. 5 as is needed to achieve the - expertise is already available inside the university’s administrative units, in particular open science center, legal objective: involving more resources in the development organizational changes committed to and administrative services, communications and hr of responsible assess action: involving researchers from all levels in the reform process: as members in committees, commenting guidelines etc. project: communication, participation and cultural change: communicate your intention to reform (2024 – 2027) 6 criteria for - open science center is actively involved in the development and implementation of evaluation policies and objective: developing criteria for the evaluation of units and institutions practices and tools: societal impact with the direct involvement of research organizations and researchers at all career action: developing an evaluation framework for the stages, review and develop criteria for assessing research units and research existing guidelines for the use of quantitative indicators in the evaluation of research assessment of societal impact. performing organization, while promoting interoperability criteria for projects and researchers https://openscience.jyu.fi/en/responsible-publication-metrics - wp 2. 2024 - 2026: develop existing and design new assessment criteria, tools, and processes with assessors with the direct involvement of researchers at all career stages, review and develop and those that are assessed criteria, tools and processes for the assessment of research projects, research teams and researchers that are adapted to their context of application. ongoing development of several tools, see oscsolutions.cc.jyu.fi action: implementing and supporting the evaluation of researchers at faculties and units - wp 2. 2024 - 2026: develop existing and design new assessment criteria, tools, and processes with assessors and those that are assessed 7 and provide transparent - existing communication channels: uno intranet pages, website, new for jyu etc. objective: make the university’s vision on research communication, guidance, and training on assessment criteria and processes as well assessment widely known as their use - several guidelines and frameworks already exist: - project: communication, participation and cultural change: communicate your intention to reform (2024 – - jyu tenure track career model and evaluation policy for professors (2019) 2027) https://www.jyu.fi/en/research/tenure-track-at-the-university-of-jyvaskyla - career frameworks for other academic staff (2024) https://uno.jyu.fi/en/hr-handbook/forms-of- employment/jyus-different-forms-of-employment-and-members-of-the-work-community action: further develop the webpages related to 3 - jyurras: jyu responsible researcher assessment symposium (2022) research evaluation action: making the university’s vision on research evaluation known to applicants and evaluators action: increasing awareness regarding the responsible use of quantitative indictors; guidelines for the use of quantitative indicators in the evaluation of researchs action: organizing training and infos regarding the evaluation of researchers -project: participation. engage those being assessed in the development and design of assessment criteria and processes. also through working groups. (2024 – 2027) action: consider making jyurras into a recurring event, e.g. every three years. 8 exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and beyond the - knowledge exchange happens already with finnish universities in several working groups, e.g. the coara objective: sharing of knowledge and experiences in an coalition national chapter and the responsible research assessment development group within the open science organised manner initiative. action: networking also with international level in the coalition for the advancement of research assessment. action: consider making jyurras into a recurring event, e.g. every three years. 9 communicate progress made on adherence to the principles and implementation of objective: communicate about the implementation of the commitments the agreement on reforming research assessment action: reporting to the university of jyväskylä´s responsible assessment steering group and jyu community (evaluation of the action plan) - wp 4. 2026 - 2027: evaluate developed and new assessment criteria, tools, and processes 4 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the state-of- the- - jyu data is already quite openly available: https://openscience.jyu.fi/en objective: contribute to research on research art in research on research, action: taking an active role in the coalition for the advancement of research assessment. action: networking nationally and internationally with other coara -universities and exchanging good practices. 5 seminaarinkatu 15 tel +358 14 260 1211 for jyu. since 1863. po box 35, fi-40014 vat number: fi02458947 jyu.fi university of jyväskylä 1/ 5 finland
