reforming research assessment at the university of reading: coara action plan 2024-2028 introduction the university of reading’s five-year coara action plan covers the period from january 2024 to december 2028. it takes account of and summarises work undertaken since march 2022, when strategic action to address research assessment reform in the university was initiated. the university established the research evaluation in recruitment and promotion working group under the sponsorship of the committee on open research and research integrity (corri) in 2022. its primary remit was to consider, make recommendations for and support the implementation of effective and auditable responsible research assessment practices which include recognition for open research practice, in recruitment, probation and promotion processes relating to research-active academic staff. its terms of reference having since evolved to encompass research assessment more broadly, this group is now known as the research assessment working group (rawg). the working group has made some progress in understanding current practice, planning reform activity, communicating its work to relevant stakeholders, and developing a draft research assessment policy, which sets out the principles and methods of responsible research assessment it proposes the university adopt. as part of this work, the working group secured approval for the university to sign the agreement on reforming research assessment1 and commit to a process of research assessment reform aligned to the agreement's principles and commitments. in 2023 the university signed the agreement and joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara).2 this action plan sets out a roadmap for the university’s reform journey over the coming years. background in 2018 the university adopted a statement on the responsible use of metrics in research, based on the leiden principles.3 while this was a positive step, the statement lacked the status of policy, and its principles have not been fully operationalised in the university's research assessment processes. the university recognised that substantial work would be required to integrate responsible research assessment practices into its policies and procedures. in the period since the statement was published, discussions in the sector have evolved from a narrower focus on the responsible use of publication metrics towards a broader framework of responsible research assessment which is more responsive to the diversity of roles and activities that contribute to the quality and impact of research, which values integrity, rigour and openness in the conduct and communication of research, and which promotes diversity, equality and inclusion. this broader research assessment framework is articulated in the principles and commitments of the agreement on reforming research assessment. 1 coalition for advancing research assessment (2022). agreement on reforming research assessment. https://coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-full-text/. 2 https://coara.eu/agreement/signatories/?category%5b0%5d=united-kingdom#signatories. 3 university of reading, statement on the responsible use of metrics in research. https://www.reading.ac.uk/research/research-environment/integrity. ©university of reading 2024 page 1 the university has also, in recent years, undertaken strategic activity to develop open research culture and practice, and in its open research action plan 2021-23 had identified objectives to include recognition and reward for open research in recruitment, promotion, performance assessment and research planning policies and procedures. this is considered to be essential to the growth of an institutional research culture that incentivises and rewards good open research practice. the research evaluation in recruitment and promotion working group was established by corri in march 2022 in response to these two drivers: to implement effective responsible research assessment processes across all relevant procedures, and to include recognition and reward for open research. as working group activity evolved so did its terms of reference to encompass research assessment more broadly. in may 2024 the group became the research assessment working group. the remit of the rawg is to develop and implement research assessment policy aligned to the coara principles, working with stakeholders to incorporate provisions into relevant procedures, to implement communications, guidance, training and support, and to establish measures and mechanisms for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of policy. the coara commitments by signing the agreement on reforming research assessment, the university subscribes to four core commitments and six supporting commitments. these are: core commitments 1. , 2. 3. , 4. supporting commitments 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. , these commitments are being operationalised by the university through corri as the strategic sponsor and the rawg as the co-ordinator of implementation. appendix 1 shows how university activity as described in the following action plan will address the coara commitments. rawg membership the rawg is chaired by professor adrian bell, associate pro vice-chancellor for prosperity and resilience. members include: the research data manager (library), the research publications adviser (library), a research and enterprise development manager (research services), a research ©university of reading 2024 page 2 communications business partner, the ref and research planning manager, an hr partner, a head of school, and three academic representatives (including one early career researcher). membership of the wg reflects the university's understanding of the key stakeholder groups that should be represented in the delivery of the wg's objectives. progress to date work over the period from march 2022 to december 2024 has included the following activities: observation of a sample of selected recruitment and personal titles (academic promotion) processes was undertaken to establish a baseline understanding of current practice. while only a small sample of cases was observed, the exercise identified several examples of sub-optimal practice, on the part of both candidates and assessors, including use of the journal impact factor, indicators of journal prestige and the h-index as signifiers of research or researcher value. it also noted that open research criteria are almost entirely unused. the wg has progressively developed a plan of action. this has evolved as the working group has developed its knowledge and as the terms of reference of the group have evolved. it is now articulated in the form of this coara action plan. the wg identified signing the agreement on reforming research assessment as an important step in terms of confirming the institutional commitment to a process of research assessment reform and communicating intent to key stakeholders and the wider research community. the university signed the agreement in july 2023 and circulated internal communications in the period following signature. a policy co-development framework has been developed. key stakeholders in research assessment have been identified, with whom co-development work will be undertaken. stakeholders include owners of processes that involve the assessment of research or researchers, who may need to implement changes in these processes. a table of key stakeholders by role is provided in appendix 3. a research assessment policy has been drafted, which incorporates the current guidance on the use of responsible metrics within a broader framework of research assessment aligned to the principles and commitments of the agreement on reforming research assessment. this draft policy will be further developed through a process of co-development with stakeholders. some early-stage efforts have been made to develop guidance and practical tools, including a ‘researcher assessment and selection criteria: best practice checklist for hiring managers'. guidance and training will be developed in collaboration with stakeholders through the policy co-development process. the wg has given some consideration to possible measures that could be used to monitor and evaluate the effects of the adoption of a new research assessment policy and the introduction of new requirements and processes in affected university procedures. these will inform co-development and implementation of monitoring and evaluation procedures in collaboration with stakeholders. action plan 2024-2028 areas of action and timelines are outlined in the following plan. the rawg will meet regularly during the period covered by the plan in order to manage progress and plan future work. it will formally report progress to corri on an annual basis and at the end of the five-year period. ©university of reading 2024 page 3 the activities below are described in six work packages (wp). appendix 2 plots the activities against a timeline for the period 2024-2028. wp1. coara action plan key objective: to develop an action plan for the implementation of the coara agreement, ensuring appropriate coordination with other relevant initiatives (e.g. the university’s open research action plan)4 key milestone: action plan approved and submitted activity start end review timelines - based on resource & orap timelines july 2024 jan 2025 allocation of responsibilities (raci) & resource to tasks jul 2024 jan 2025 final timeline agreed by wg jul 2024 jan 2025 draft plan approved by corri jul 2024 oct 2024 action plan submission jan 2025 the coara action plan covers the period from january 2024 to december 2028. this will cover the main policy and procedure implementation phase to december 2026 and a subsequent period of operational integration, monitoring and evaluation. annual reviews and updates of the action plan will be reported to corri, the wg sponsoring committee. wp2. policy development key objective: to co-develop a policy for research assessment in line with the commitments of coara that is appropriate for the university key milestone: policy approved, owners of implementation elements identified & key changes to existing processes identified activity start end identify key stakeholders jul 2024 dec 2024 create a co-development framework jul 2024 dec 2024 co-development with research division leads dec 2024 apr 2025 co-development with heads of school/heads of department jan 2025 apr 2025 co-development with academic staff/researchers jan 2025 apr 2025 co-development with doctoral and researcher college (for phd jan 2025 apr 2025 students/post-docs) co-development with probation/recruitment/rewards/r6 to r7 promotion jan 2025 apr 2025 process owners and key stakeholders co-development with academic promotions process owner and key jan 2025 apr 2025 stakeholders co-development with performance and development review process jan 2025 apr 2025 owner co-development with research planning processes (research division jan 2025 apr 2025 operational plans, annual research plans, internal/external funding/support selection) owner and key stakeholders 4 university of reading, open research action plan. https://www.reading.ac.uk/research/research- environment/open-research ©university of reading 2024 page 4 activity start end co-development with heads of functions within research & innovation jan 2025 apr 2025 directorate review draft research assessment policy jan 2025 may 2025 submit for approval & publish research assessment policy may 2025 jun 2025 a research assessment policy will be the keystone of the university's reformed research assessment framework. it will be aligned to the agreement on reforming research assessment and set out the principles and methods of research assessment that the university and its employees are expected to follow. the policy will supersede the university's statement on the responsible use of metrics in research, which will be incorporated into policy guidance. a draft policy has been developed by the wg. this will form the basis of co-development activity with identified stakeholders. co-development will continue into april 2025 and will involve engagement with: owners of procedures affected by the policy, including those relating to recruitment, probation, promotion and reward, performance and development review (pdr) and research planning processes; those who will implement and support implementation of policy provisions; researchers impacted by the policy. a co-development framework has been developed which will enable key stakeholders to inform the development of the final policy, to consider the impacts of the policy on existing processes, to identify changes that need to be made to policies and procedures, and to facilitate agreement about method and timing of implementation. the co-development process will lead to a revision of the policy in spring 2025. the wg will seek university approval for the policy once this revision is complete, with a view to publication of an approved policy with supporting guidance by june 2025. wp3. policy implementation key objective: to understand how process owners intend to implement the policy and their expected timings. to support process owners in their implementation and training key milestone: updated policies, guidance and training for all processes activity start end develop and publish research assessment policy generic guidance may 2025 oct 2025 develop responsible research assessment generic training module may 2025 oct 2025 recruitment process owner to refine approach to implementation of apr 2025 sep 2025 changes (including guidance & training) and suggested timelines probation process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes apr 2025 sep 2025 (including guidance & training) and suggested timelines. rewards process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes apr 2025 sep 2025 (including guidance & training) and suggested timelines. promotion process owner to refine approach to implementation of apr 2025 sep 2025 changes (including guidance & training) and suggested timelines. research planning process owner to refine approach to implementation of apr 2025 sep 2025 changes (including guidance & training) and suggested timelines. process owners implement changes (timings to be revised based on jul 2025 dec 2026 information above, assume gradual implementation) review and update generic research assessment training module apr 2026 sep 2026 ©university of reading 2024 page 5 guidance and training will be developed in spring-autumn 2025 to support implementation of the research assessment policy. requirements gathered through policy co-development will inform the guidance and training provided. guidance and tools will be made available from the policy web pages to support practical implementation of the policy. this will include guidance on application of the policy in specific procedures and may include supporting resources such as the 'researcher assessment and selection criteria: best practice checklist for hiring managers' which has been drafted. a responsible research assessment training module will be developed and hosted on the university's online learning platform, uorlearn. this will provide basic training in responsible research assessment concepts and practices and the requirements of the research assessment policy. co-development work undertaken in wp2 will have enabled owners of affected policies and procedures to identify changes that need to be made and plan for their implementation. the wg will work with procedure owners to support the implementation process over the period from spring 2025 to the end of 2026. guidance and training to support effective implementation and compliance with policy will be further developed during 2026. wp4. engagement and communications key objective: to ensure that all staff, line managers and decision makers are aware of the policy and the changes and timing of changes to processes relevant to them key milestone: policy and implications communicated, understood and adopted by all staff as relevant to their roles activity start end develop communication and engagement plan 2024-28 jan 2025 jun 2025 implement comms and engagement plan (exact timings depending on apr 2025 dec 2026 implementation) a communication and engagement plan will be developed, and will be updated annually when the action plan is updated. work in wp2 has already identified key stakeholders and stakeholder groups in the university who need to be engaged as part of implementation (see appendix 3). key elements of communication will involve delivery of a public research assessment web page providing access to the research assessment policy and supporting information and guidance, which can be linked to from relevant policies and procedures and other sources, such as job advertisements. training resources will also be highlighted. a communications campaign will support formal adoption of the policy by the university and its progressive implementation in related policies and procedures. wp5. monitoring and evaluation key objective: to develop mechanisms and indicators to evaluate progress in the use of coara principles across all relevant processes and by all staff key milestone: approach to evaluation agreed with stakeholders, data & measures agreed activity start end define format and bau owner of the evaluation and monitoring process may 2025 dec 2025 identify measures & mechanisms to be used for monitoring and may 2025 dec 2025 evaluation and measures approved by corri ©university of reading 2024 page 6 activity start end develop tools and processes based on agreed format to enable jun 2025 mar 2026 monitoring & evaluation implementation monitoring oct 2025 dec 2028 evaluation oct 2025 dec 2028 five-year report to corri and coara jul 2028 dec 2028 policy co-development with procedure owners will consider what information will need to be collected in order to monitor, evaluate and report on implementation and compliance, and methods by which information will be collected and reported. monitoring will be implemented when the research assessment policy is adopted and as related procedures implement relevant provisions. evaluation of implementation will continue throughout the period of the action plan, to the end of 2028. at the end of the five-year period a five-year progress report will be provided to corri, and further to approval, to coara. wp6. external engagement key objective: to ensure that university initiatives are informed by sector best practice and that uor learning is shared with the sector key milestone: membership and participation in key sector networks activity start end agree priorities for engagement with coara and responsible individuals jan 2024 sep 2024 identify opportunities for funding bids to coara to support the action plan jan 2024 dec 2028 sign dora and undertake communications dec 2026 jul 2027 engage with other external initiatives and investigate signing up (e.g. more sep 2027 jul 2028 than our rank initiative) the university will participate in coara as appropriate to communicate progress and exchange good practice with the wider community. it will maintain awareness of, seek to benefit from, and contribute to the activities of coara working groups where this is relevant. it will participate throughout the period as a member of the uk national chapter of coara.5 the wg will monitor opportunities to seek funding to support implementation of the action plan, for example through coara boost cascade funding calls. the wg will also maintain awareness of relevant external initiatives of relevance to its remit and engage as appropriate. these include the uk reproducibility network’s open and responsible research reward and recognition project (or4) to support the institutional implementation of recognition and reward for open research,6 which the university is engaging with through its open research action plan implementation group, and the more than our rank initiative to highlight the importance of avoiding the use of rankings in research assessment.7 it is hoped that by december 2026 the university will have acquired sufficient confidence in its reformed research assessment policy and procedures to be able to sign dora. a proposal to sign dora will be formally considered by the university, with a view to signing by december 2026. 5 coara national chapter: uk. https://coara.eu/coalition/national-chapters/coara-national-chapter-uk-2/ 6 ukrn, or4. https://www.ukrn.org/open-and-responsible-researcher-reward-and-recognition-or4/. 7 inorms, more than our rank. https://inorms.net/more-than-our-rank/ ©university of reading 2024 page 7 version date authors description 1.0 26/02/2024 robert darby first version 2.0 03/05/2024 adrian bell, robert darby, rachel second version thorns 3.0 13/06/2024 robert darby clean version following approval by university board for research and innovation 10th june 2024 4.0 22/11/2024 wanda tejada, robert darby, plan re-organised into work packages. adrian bell some changes to scope of activities and timelines. 5.0 16/12/2024 wanda tejada, robert darby, some timelines adjusted. approved adrian bell by pvc-r for sharing with coara. ©university of reading 2024 page 8 appendix1. how coara commitments will be addressed no. commitment how the commitment will be addressed 1 , the core commitments (1-4) will be explicitly addressed in the research research in accordance with the needs and nature of the assessment policy, updates to relevant policies and procedures, and related research communications, guidance, training and support. compliance with the 2 for commitments will be monitored and evaluated. which peer review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators we will investigate signing up to the more than our rank initiative to support 3 abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal- commitment 4. and publication-based metrics, 4 5 as is the rawg has been established under the sponsorship of corri with a remit to needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to implement effective, auditable responsible research assessment that includes recognition for open research. we will investigate requirements for support to effectively operationalise policy over the course of the action plan and will make recommendations where the need for additional resources has been identified. 6 review and develop research assessment criteria, tools and we will review and make recommendations for the update of research processes assessment criteria in relevant processes. we will work with owners of affected procedures to develop practical guidance and tools in support of effective policy implementation, and we will make recommendations as appropriate. 7 and provide we will develop a communication and engagement plan for the work of the transparent communication, guidance, and training on group and strategic communication activity which will be undertaken assessment criteria and processes as well as their use throughout the period of the action plan. guidance and training will be developed and promoted within the institution. 8 exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning we will engage with coara, including through the uk national chapter, and within and beyond the coalition seek opportunities to share and discuss practice. ©university of reading 2024 page 9 no. commitment how the commitment will be addressed 9 communicate progress made on adherence to the principles and we will report on progress annually to corri and highlight progress in internal implementation of the commitments communications. progress will be reported to coara at the end of the action plan period, in 2028. 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence we will implement ongoing monitoring and evaluation of implementation, which and the state-of-the-art in research on research, and make data will be reported to corri and will inform strategic activity. openly available for evidence gathering and research ©university of reading 2024 page 10 appendix 2. action plan timeline 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 r jan-mar apr-jun jul-sep oct-dec jan-mar apr-jun jul-sep oct-dec jan-mar apr-jun jul-sep oct-dec jan-mar apr-jun jul-sep oct-dec jan-mar apr-jun jul-sep oct-dec activity wg a c i lead wp wp key objective wp key milestone team q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 q1 q2 q3 q4 coara action plan to develop an action review timelines - based on resource & orap timelines wt rd rd wg corri 1 plan for the allocation of responsibilities (raci) & resource to tasks wt rd rd wg corri action plan approved implementation of the final timelineagreed by wg rd wt ab wg corri & submitted coara agreement, draft plan approved by corri rd wt ab wg corri ensuring appropriate action plan submission rd ab wg corri policy development identify key stakeholders wt rd ab wg corri create a co-development framework rd ac co-development with rdls ac ab/rd co-development with hos/hod jd ab/ac to co-develop a policy policy approved, co-development with academic staff/researchers er ab/jd for research owners of co-development with darc (for phd students/post-docs) darc er/ab assessment in line 2 implementation co-development with probation/recruitment/rewards/r6 to r7 promotion process owners and key stakeholders abon draft er/rt policy to identify: hr, probations a) suggested corri committee, changes to hos, thedrc policy, b) impact on existing processes, c) suggested approach and timings to implement changes with the commitments elements identified & co-development with academic promotions process owner and key stakeholders on draft policy to identify: a) rt suggested ab/jd changes to the hr,policy, promotion b) impact corri committees, on existing hos,processes, rdls, drc,c)res suggested staff cttee approach and timings to implement changes of coara that is key changes to existing co-development with pdr process owner jd rt/er appropriate for the processes identified co-development with heads of functions within research & innovation directorate ab rd/wt university co-development with research planning processes (rdops, arp, internal/external funding/support selection) ab owner and er/wtkey stakeholders rdls,on ucri, drafthos, corri policy to identify: a) suggested changes to the policy, b) impact on existing processes, c) suggested approach and timings to implement changes review ra policy rd wg corri submit for approval & publish ra policy rd corri, ueb policy implementation develop and publish research assessment policy generic guidance rd ?? ab wg, samplewg, of stakeholders corri develop responsible research assessment generic training module kr rd, er, ab wg, wg, corri wt sample of stakeholde rs recruitment process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes (including guidance & training) hr rt hr hos, rds, wg, corri and suggested timelines. wg to support as needed. (tbc) (tbc) ueb, line managers to understand how probation process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes (including guidance & training) prob rt prob probation wg, corri process owners intend and suggested timelines. wg to support as needed. chair chair cttees, hos to implement the policy and their updated policies, 3 rewards process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes (including guidance & training) rewar rt reward rewards wg, corri expected timings. to guidance and training and suggested timelines. wg to support as needed. ds s chair cttees, hos support process for all processes chair owners in their promotion process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes (including guidance & training) promo rt promot promotion wg, corri implementation and and suggested timelines. wg to support as needed. tions ions cttees, hos training chair chair rpp process owner to refine approach to implementation of changes (including guidance & training) and pvci ab/wt pvcri rdls, uoa wg, corri suggested timelines. wg to support as needed. r&i leads process owners implement changes (est. - timings to be revised based on information above, assume proces wg proces tbc tbc gradual implementation) s team s owner owners s review and update generic research assessment training module rd ?? ab engagement and comms to ensure that all staff, ck wg ab tbc corri line managers and policy and team decision makers are implications 4 aware of the policy communicated, develop communication and engagement plan 2024-28 and the changes and understood and implement comms and engagement plan (exact timings depending on implementation) ck wg ab tbc corri timing of changes to adopted by all staff as team processes relevant to relevant to their roles them monitoring and evaluation to develop define format and bau owner of the evaluation and monitoring process tbc tbc ab riu/pso/h mechanisms and r indicators to evaluate approach to identify measures & mechanisms to be used for monitoring and evaluation and measures approved by tbc tbc ab riu/pso/h 5 progress in the use of evaluation agreed with corri r coara principles stakeholders, data & develop tools and processes based on agreed format to enable monitoring & evaluation tbc tbc tbc tbc across all relevant measures agreed implementation monitoring tbc processes and by all evaluation tbc ab staff five-year report to corri and coara ab ab external engagement agree priorities for engagement with coara and responsible individuals ab rd to ensure that university initiatives membership and 6 are informed by sector participation in key best practice and that sector networks uor learning is shared with the sector identify opportunities for funding bids to coara to support the action plan rd tbc sign dora and undertake communications ab tbc ab engage with other external initiatives and investigate signing up (e.g., more than our rank initiative) rd tbc kr ©university of reading 2024 page 11 appendix 3. key stakeholders by role process process role name university role rewards school chair head of school various manages school process rewards hr various advise and coordination promotions school committee chair head of school various manages school process promotions school personal titles committee members various contribute to school process promotions university personal titles committee chairv c chairs university committee promotions university personal titles member various contributes to university process promotions right of attendance university secretary contributes to university process promotions right of attendance director of hr contributes to university process promotions secretariat university secretary supports process professorial salaries advisory group committee chair pvc r&i chairs committee professorial salaries advisory group committee members various contribute to the process professorial salaries advisory group secretariat hr supports process professorial salaries advisory group researchers various use process probation school chair head of school various manages school process probation academic probation sub-committee chair[redacted] chairs university committee probation committee member various contribute to process probation secretariat hr supports process probation researchers various use process pdr head of school head of school various manages and implements school process pdr head of department various manages and implements dept process pdr academic line managers various implement individual process pdr hr various design and approve pdr researchers various use process research planning ucri chair pvc r&i chairs committee research planning ucri members various design and contribute to the process research planning secretariat rdo supports process research planning rdls various implement the process research planning researchers various use process ref planning ref pg chair pvc r&i chairs committee ref planning ref pg members various design and approve process ref planning secretariat rdo supports process ref planning uoa leads various implement process ref planning researchers varous use process recruitment hr various design, approve and implement process recruitment school panel chair hos implements process recruitment school panel members various implement process recruitment institutional panel chair vc/pvcs implement process recruitment institutional panel members various implement process general support head research services, r&i directorate [redacted] manages support and guidance university librarian, r&i directorate [redacted] manages support and guidance all researchers impacted by changes ©university of reading 2024 page 12
