coara action plan, universitat politècnica de valència. 2024-2027 this document describes the action plan that the upv will conduct between 2024 and 2027, which has been approved by the iai (research activity index) updating and monitoring group on 2 may 2024 and by the r&d&i commission on 27 may 2024. 1. context the evaluation of research activity by funding and accreditation agencies, academic institutions and other groups is evolving as a result of a demand from the international community. there are different initiatives to which the universitat politècnica de valència has adhered. the aim is to improve the quality, implementation and impact of research, basing the evaluation of this activity on criteria that consider quality, impact, diversity, transparency, inclusiveness and collaboration. in december 2012, a group of professionals in academic journal publishing came together during the american society for cell biology (ascb) annual meeting in san francisco, california. this group developed a series of recommendations known as the san francisco statement on research assessment (the declaration on research assessment, dora https://sfdora.org/wp- content/uploads/2020/12/dora_spanish.pdf). dora aimed to advance the research evaluation by introducing novel approaches, such as the impact factor of a journal, not replacing the assessment of the quality of the published work or the professional research career. upv joined the declaration in december 2020, together with thousands of institutions, organisations, agencies, universities and research centres from all disciplines. other initiatives, such as the leiden manifesto on research indicators (hicks et al. (2015) the leiden manifesto for research metrics. nature, 520, 429-431.) http://www.leidenmanifesto.org/, or the joint position of the european university association (eua) and science europe (2019), also expressed the need for a review of the evaluation of research activity. the reform of the research assessment system was incorporated into the european research area policy agenda: overview of actions for the period 2022-2024: action 3: advance towards the reform of the assessment system for research, researchers and institutions to improve their quality, performance and impact, https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021- 11/ec_rtd_era-policy-agenda-2021.pdf, and an agreement document on reforming the assessment system was developed (https://coara.eu/app/uploads/2022/09/2022_07_19_rra_agreement_final.pdf) in december 2022, the international coalition for advancing research assessment (coara, https://coara.eu/) was constituted through the adhesion of the international institutions that signed this agreement. upv joined coara on december 22. by april 2024, a total of 637 organisations from all over the world have joined coara. during 2023, national groups (chapters) are created in coara. in may 2023, upv joined the spanish chapter of the spanish institutions in the coalition (https://coara.eu/coalition/national-chapters/coara-national-chapter- spain/) constituted by the conference of rectors of spanish universities (crue), the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca) and the spanish national research council (csic), supported by the ministry of science, innovation and universities. the spanish chapter currently brings together more than 55 institutions, of which 37 are universities. 1 the commitment to the reform of the evaluation system is also reflected in the new regulations, such as the new royal decree 678/2023 of 18 july, which regulates the state accreditation for access to university teaching bodies and the system of competitive examinations for access to positions in these bodies (https://www.boe.es/buscar/doc.php?id=boe-a-2023-19027), the new criteria for the evaluation of six-year period (https://www.aneca. es/convocatoria-2023), the principles of the enca, the national strategy for open science (https://www.ciencia.gob.es/infogeneralportal/documento/c30b29d7-abac-4b31-9156- 809927b5ee49), and the implementation of the quality label for scientific collections promoted by the union of spanish university publishers (une) and endorsed by the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca) and the spanish foundation for science and technology (fecyt). the universitat politècnica de valència has been evaluating the research, development, innovation and transfer activity of its staff since 1991. initially, simple scales were used, including research, development, and technology transfer concepts and artistic and literary activities. the initial scales evolved into research activity indexes (iai), which were modified at different times, 1998, 2000, 2008, 2011, 2014, 2017, establishing the personalised research activity index (iaip) and the valuation of personalised research activity (vaip), for the evaluation of the personal activity of the different categories of research staff (academic and research staff, pdi, civil servant, permanent, and temporary; research staff, pi, including trainees and research support staff) and the research activity index of research structures (iaie) and the assessment of research activity of research structures (vaie), for the assessment of the activity of the different structures in which research staff are grouped (university research institutes, iuls, research structures, epls, and departments (including research groups within departments)). all these years of applying a system for evaluating research, development, innovation and transfer activity have yielded a very positive balance. the items used for this assessment have been improved with the advice of the monitoring and updating group of the research activity index, created in 2017, and with the technical support of the technical committee of experts, belonging to different fields and sub-fields of research. the evaluation systems have been adapted to the various strategic plans (the latest one, the sirve plan https://www.upv.es/contenidos/upv_sirve/download/18245 strategic plan for 2023-2027), to the different fields of knowledge (engineering, sciences, humanities, social sciences, architecture, arts, etc.), aligned with the criteria of the national commission for the evaluation of research activity (cneai), used in the evaluation of research areas, and with the human resources excellence strategy for research (hrs4r), recognised by the “label of excellence” awarded to the upv by the eu in 2020. the principles of the new charter & code for researchers on which the hrs4r label is based are also aligned with the commitments of the coara agreement. the research activity index monitoring and updating group is currently working on adapting the upv's research activity evaluation system to these international initiatives, dora and coara, which aim to design research evaluation systems that include all the diversity of contributions that make responsible use of bibliometric indicators and that are based on qualitative indicators. 2. coara action plan, universitat politècnica de valència. 2024-2027 upv joined coara on december 22. as a participant in the agreement on reforming research assessment, which forms the basis of the coalition, the universitat politècnica de valència is 2 committed to disseminating its progress in the review and improvement of criteria, tools and procedures, consistent with the 10 core commitments assumed in the agreement (https://coara.eu/agreement/the-commitments/): 1. recognise the diversity of contributions and careers in . 2. base research evaluation primarily on qualitative assessment for which peer review is central, supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators. 3. avoid inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal and publication-based metrics, particularly inappropriate uses of the journal impact factor (jif) and the h-index. 4. . 5. commit resources to reform research evaluation as necessary to achieve the organisational changes it commits. 6. review and develop research evaluation criteria, tools and processes. 7. disseminate research assessment reform and provide transparent communication, guidance and training on assessment criteria and processes and their use. 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and outside the coalition. 9. communicate progress made in adhering to the principles and implementing the commitments. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on sound evidence and state-of-the-art research on research, and make data publicly available for evidence gathering and research. for each commitment, the purpose, scope, proposed actions, and expected timeline are indicated below. 3 1. recognise the diversity of contributions and careers in purpose: this commitment will broaden the recognition of diverse research practices, activities and careers, considering the specific nature of research disciplines and other research endeavours. scope changes in assessment practices should enable recognition of the wide diversity of valuable contributions that research makes to science and for the benefit of society, including diverse outputs beyond journal publications and regardless of the language in which they are communicated; practices that contribute to the robustness, openness, transparency and inclusiveness of research and the research process, including peer review, teamwork and collaboration; activities including teaching, leadership, supervision, training and mentoring. it is also important that the assessment facilitates the recognition and valorisation of diverse roles and careers in research, including data manager, software engineer and data scientist roles, technical roles, public outreach, science diplomacy, science advisor and science communicator roles, to name a few. the aim is to enable organisations to broaden the spectrum of what they value in research while recognising that this may vary from discipline to discipline and that not everyone should be expected to contribute to all activities simultaneously. actions 1.1. the upv has a research activity index monitoring and updating group comprising members from each of the recognised scientific fields/disciplines who discuss the different ways of identifying the diverse contributions of our researchers. 1.2. a process of continuous adaptation to the changes proposed by the national commission for the evaluation of research activity (cneai) is carried out, recognising the different fields of research and contributions in various disciplines and ways of contribution. 1.3. attention is focused on careers of all profiles and disciplines (arts and humanities, medicine and life sciences, social sciences, engineering and technology, natural sciences and architecture) to assess their contributions and curricula properly. temporality continuous commitment 4 2. base research evaluation primarily on qualitative assessment for which peer review is central, supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators purpose: this commitment will move towards research evaluation criteria focusing on quality while recognising that the responsible use of quantitative indicators can support evaluation where it is meaningful and relevant, depending on the context. scope research evaluation should be based on quantitative and qualitative assessment, for which peer review is essential, supported by quantitative indicators used responsibly. peer review is the most robust known method for assessing quality and has the advantage of being in the hands of the research community. peer review processes must be designed to comply with the fundamental principles of rigour and transparency: expert assessment, transparency, impartiality, fairness, appropriateness, confidentiality, integrity and ethical considerations, gender, equality and diversity. the research community regularly re-evaluates and improves peer review to address the biases and imperfections to which any method is prone. alongside peer review, revised or possibly new criteria, tools and processes appropriate for assessing quality could be explored. moving towards assessment practices that rely more on qualitative methods may require additional efforts by research staff, who should be recognised for these efforts. their contributions to peer review of their peers' work should be valued as part of their career progression. actions 2.1. in the research activity index monitoring and updating group at the upv, a discussion was initiated to explore the implementation of qualitative evaluation methods. this effort poses challenges, given the complexities of adhering to national regulations in this area and the need for human resources for this implementation. 2.2. a technical expert commission conducts qualitative evaluations in various commissions and technically assesses different types of research, development, innovation and transfer results. 2.3. progress will be made in the necessary actions to give the peer review task curricular recognition. 2.4. progress will be made in extending the range of results to be assessed by peers. the commissions will be adapted as the diversity of items to be assessed increases. temporality continuous commitment 5 3. avoid inappropriate uses in research evaluation of journal and publication-based metrics, in particular, improper uses of the journal impact factor (jif) and the h-index purpose: this commitment will reduce the dominance of a limited set of quantitative journals- and publication-based metrics. scope inappropriate uses of journal and publication-based metrics in research evaluation should be avoided. in particular, this means removing the improper use of metrics such as journal impact factor (jif), article influence score (ais) and h-index as sole indicators of quality and impact. inappropriate uses" include relying exclusively on authorship metrics (e.g. counting articles, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; assessing results based on parameters related to the place, format or language of publication; any other metric that does not adequately capture quality and/or impact. actions 3.1. the upv's calls for applications for contracts, grants, etc., will be monitored to redirect the criteria and focus them on the use of contextualised indicators in accordance with the coara principles. 3.2. the possibility of including indicators other than the impact factor and the h-index in the contributions will be reviewed, for example, the field-weighted citation impact (fwci) or others, considering the scientific dissemination and the media impact of the research. temporality continuous commitment 6 4. purpose: this commitment will help prevent the metrics used by international rankings, those that are inappropriate for evaluating research staff, from filtering into research and the evaluation of research staff themselves. it will help the research community, and organisations regain autonomy in shaping evaluation practices rather than having to abide by criteria and methodologies set by external commercial companies. this could include maintaining control over methodologies and classification data. scope recognising that some international rankings of research organisations are not in all cases "fair and accountable", the criteria used by these rankings should not continuously be transposed to the assessment of individuals, research teams and research units. where ranking approaches are deemed necessary, such as benchmarking and country or institutional performance reviews, the methodological limitations of such approaches should be recognised. actions 4.1. the upv will review the impact that the position in the rankings of institutions with which our research groups and/or their members collaborate may have on the evaluation of the research activity of upv staff and will extend the evaluation of collaborating institutions with other criteria not based solely on rankings. for example, the research participation of different institutions in upv and authored publications is valued, giving a higher score to those belonging to prestigious institutions. this use will be reviewed, including other additional criteria. temporality continuous commitment 7 5. commit resources to reform research evaluation as necessary to achieve the organisational changes to which it commits purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations allocate the necessary resources, either in budget or staff, to improve research evaluation practices within the agreed time frame. scope the allocation of resources by evaluation authorities, research funding, and implementing organisations is necessary for reforming evaluation practices. resources should be allocated as necessary for each organisation to achieve the changes that will enable adherence to the principles and implementation of the commitments. this includes resources to implement changes in research evaluation, including planning and monitoring progress; to raise awareness among stakeholders; to educate, train and support research and other staff involved in the evaluation, including reviewers and evaluators; and to support the necessary infrastructure, such as tools and services, for the transparent collection and processing of data on research evaluation practices. particular attention should be given to making resources available to enable the involvement of researchers at all stages of their careers in research evaluation reform. actions 5.1. several upv units have been designated to meet this commitment. for the evaluation of research activity at the upv, the work is carried out by the research programmes area linked to the vice-rectorate for research and from the library, documentation and open science area, and the doctoral school, linked to the same vice-rectorate. the communication area linked to the vice-rectorate for internationalisation and communication, the cultural action area, and the upv press linked to the vice-rectorate for art, science, technology and society also participate in this activity. 5.2. an internal project has been set up within the framework of the hrs4r strategy that includes funds for hiring staff and financing courses and conferences to inform the university community and prepare them for the planned changes. 5.3. dissemination and training activities are carried out for the researchers in training from the doctoral school and the cultural action area. 5.4. the university participates with its funds in conferences and fairs, such as the job fair, from which the implemented changes are disseminated to the university community. 5.5. in addition, within the framework of the investigo programme (special contracts for the development of research activities of young researchers), we are carrying out a research project studying the national research evaluation system, which will lead to a selection of good practices and changes in our internal evaluation methods. 5.6. we are working on commissions associated with hrs4r, which are associated with participation in the enhance alliance and the carpe group in the technical expert commission, and we are studying the possibility of increasing the recognition of its expert members. 8 5.7. the budget will be reviewed to enhance the evaluation of research activity by aneca for non-civil servant staff. temporality continuous commitment 9 6. review and develop research evaluation criteria, tools and processes purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations allocate the necessary resources, either in budget or staff, to improve research evaluation practices within the agreed timeframe. 6.1 criteria for units and institutions with the direct involvement of researchers at all stages of their careers to review and develop criteria for evaluating research units and research-performing organisations while promoting interoperability. objective: this commitment will ensure that national, regional and organisational authorities and evaluation agencies review and, where necessary, develop criteria for the evaluation of units and organisations conducting research activities in accordance with the principles. it will encourage the responsible use of metrics in evaluating units and organisations conducting research and help avoid contradictions or incompatibilities between the evaluation of research, researchers and organisations conducting research. it will also safeguard the interoperability of adapted or newly developed evaluation processes. 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers with the direct involvement of research staff at all career stages, review and develop criteria, tools and processes for evaluating research projects, research teams and their members adapted to their context of application. purpose: this engagement will enable the recognition of diverse research activities and practices by reviewing and developing evaluation criteria, tools and processes. it will ensure that organisations review their processes and make tangible changes through the development of existing or new evaluation approaches, individually or in collaboration with others, in accordance with the principles. scope 6.1. criteria for evaluating research-performing units and organisations, including universities, research centres and research infrastructures, should be reviewed and adapted. new criteria should be developed where necessary, based on evidence. this should be done closely with the evaluating staff and the individuals to be evaluated, including research organisations and their researchers. the changes should enhance the capacity to assess quality by enabling research units and institutions to recognise all contributions to quality research. such recognition includes early sharing of data and results, open collaboration, teamwork, consideration of contributions to the research ecosystem, knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact. national, regional and organisational authorities and evaluation agencies should coordinate to ensure their methodologies and processes are interoperable while respecting the necessary adaptation to each context. 6.2: the criteria, tools and processes should be reviewed and developed together with research staff from different disciplines and at different career stages and should allow recognition of the diversity of research activities and practices that contribute to research quality, including diverse outputs in other languages. this should enhance the capacity to assess quality by enabling recognition of all contributions to quality research of the projects and the research staff and groups. this includes recognition of early sharing of data and results, open collaboration and teamwork. reformed practices for assessing individual researchers should consider future 10 potential alongside research staff's individual contexts and careers. they should also recognise that researchers cannot excel in all types of tasks and provide a framework that allows research staff to contribute to the definition of their research goals and aspirations. research funders' research evaluation should consider disciplinary, multi-, inter-, and transdisciplinary research, as well as contributions to knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural, and social impact. actions 6.1. several upv units have been designated to meet this commitment. to evaluate research activity at the upv, work is carried out by the research programmes area linked to the vice-rectorate for research and from the library, documentation and open science area, and the doctoral school, linked to the same vice-rectorate. the communication area linked to the vice-rectorate for internationalisation and communication, the cultural action area, and the upv press linked to the vice-rectorate for art, science, technology and society also participate in this activity. 6.2. the research programmes area has developed a new version of the annual evaluation report on researcher activity (https://www.upv.es/entidades/vinv/menu_urlc.html?/entidades/vinv/info/u0957004.pdf this report brings together the main characteristics of the research activity of upv staff. it presents a historical series of the different indexes used and other types of analysis by research structures, professional categories, and areas of knowledge broken down by gender. it is intended to be useful for internal management, to motivate the activity of our researchers to increase r&d&i activity, artistic creation, and transfer, both in quantity and quality and to increase its social impact. this report has been developed in interaction with the researcher community and will be improved similarly. 6.3. work is being carried out to adapt the upv's curriculum management tool (current research information system, cris) and the tools used at the upv to evaluate scientific activity to adjust them to the coara criteria. 6.4. work is being carried out on the design and/or use of internal management tools, curricula and others interoperable with external infrastructures, fecyt, aneca, ministries, etc. 6.5. work is being carried out on updating the public research portal to disseminate all research results in all disciplines (arts and humanities, medicine and life sciences, social sciences, engineering and technology, natural sciences and architecture), including coara indicators. 6.6. the upv press collaborates in reinforcing the quality criteria to meet the requirements of the curricular accreditation of research staff. promote transfer, visibility and impact by publishing and disseminating quality content in open access in response to the guidelines of open science and european and national policies (enca, law of science, etc.). the upv press has an editorial policy for operating all research publications under the edupv imprint. likewise, it establishes its open access policy based on international mandates. temporality continuous commitment 11 7. publicise research assessment reform and provide transparent communication, guidance and training on assessment criteria and processes, as well as on their use purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations make the reform known to all parties. it will ensure that organisations transparently communicate the criteria, tools, and processes used for research evaluation and train researchers and evaluators on their use. scope without widespread awareness of reform and training of those being evaluated and, above all, those evaluating, progress will be slow, if not impossible. organisations must be clear and transparent about evaluation processes and their tools and criteria. they should make guidance on their evaluation approaches publicly available and train those involved in the evaluation process. they should allow those being assessed access to the criteria, data and results of reviews or deliberations used in their assessment within the limits of confidentiality. particular attention should be paid to raising awareness among research staff at all stages of their careers. actions 7.1. several courses and dissemination sessions are being held to inform and prepare upv staff for the planned changes. 7.2. the university community will be informed of the changes implemented in the regulation to evaluate r&d&i activities. 7.3. the update of the aforementioned research portal will show the profile of the researchers. 7.4. the changes will be disseminated on the library and scientific documentation service website in the section dedicated to research. similarly, the library service will provide training and guidance in the processes of research accreditation and evaluation (six-year period), focusing with greater emphasis on the changes that will be implemented. 7.5. the research programmes area of the vice-rectorate for research will disseminate the changes in the evaluation system as they are implemented in the section of the website corresponding to research activity at the upv. in addition, information sessions will be organised for different groups (new research staff, staff in charge of the various phases of research evaluation, members of the expert technical committee, etc.) to provide training on the latest features of the evaluation system. 7.6. the upv press collaborates with the label of quality in academic publishing (cea- apq label), promoted by the union of spanish university publishers (une) and endorsed by the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca) and the spanish foundation for science and technology (fecyt), as an indication of the quality of publications for the evaluation of the merits of research activity. this recognition is expressed in the evaluation criteria of the national evaluation commission of research activity and the evaluation criteria of aneca for the six-year research periods and the academia programme. temporality continuous commitment 12 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning within and outside the coalition purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations exchange and use information for mutual learning. it will help to avoid fragmentation, contribute to the consistency of evaluation practices across organisations and enable the mobility of research staff. it will also allow those furthest ahead to share approaches and lessons learned to benefit those who need to move further along their reform path. scope while respecting each other's autonomy, organisations should share practices and experiences to facilitate mutual learning. this exchange should include contributing to developing common orientations and approaches to minimise contradictions or incompatibilities between evaluation practices used by different organisations. it should also include the exchange of lessons learned to ensure continuous mutual improvements. actions 8.1. several courses and dissemination sessions are being held to inform and prepare upv staff for the planned changes. 8.2. through its participation in the enhance alliance, the upv has been discussing and sharing experiences in joining the coalition and adopting its principles. in addition, the upv has been actively advocating for enhance members to join coara. this will be extended to the other alliances upv has (e.g. carpe) and other future alliances. 8.3. attendance of members of the rector's team and their staff, vice-rectorate directors, area directors, and advisory staff at coara meetings, conferences and webinars, as well as being part of the national chapter. temporality continuous commitment 13 9. communicate progress made in adhering to the principles and implementing the commitments purpose: this commitment will ensure that organisations update each other on progress. it will encourage careful self-reflection and monitoring of their own adherence to the principles and progress towards meeting the commitments. scope an important part of this initiative is to demonstrate progress in implementing the commitments and adherence to the principles. organisations should commit to regularly updating each other and their communities on their adherence and progress. this process involves being open to scrutiny from their communities, sharing successes and challenges, and communicating their experiences to facilitate collective progress. actions 9.1. several courses and dissemination sessions are being held to inform and prepare upv staff for these changes, and more are planned for the near future. 9.2. through its participation in the enhance alliance, the upv has been discussing and sharing experiences in joining the coalition and adopting its principles. in addition, the upv has been actively advocating for enhance members to join coara. this will be extended to the other alliances upv has (e.g. carpe) and other future alliances. 9.3. the evolution of the research activities carried out by the university community will be evaluated by means of comparative studies of the reports of the different years prepared by the research programmes area of the vice-rectorate for research. 9.4. the changes implemented in the regulation for the evaluation of research activities will be publicised. 9.3. an annual report on what has been achieved will be written. temporality continuous commitment 14 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on sound evidence and state-of-the-art research on research, and make data publicly available for evidence gathering and research purpose: this engagement will ensure that decisions on evaluation approach are evidence- based. it will help organisations reflect on their processes, understand whether evaluation practices achieve the desired objectives, and engage in evolving evaluation based on new evidence as it becomes available. it will also help ensure control and ownership of research evaluation data by the researcher community. scope there is growing evidence that current evaluation processes, which rely on publication- and journal-based metrics, are prone to multiple biases. as several organisations pilot approaches that use more qualitative research evaluation (e.g., narrative and evidence-based curricula, new evaluation frameworks and indicators), assessing and monitoring their impact based on rigorous evidence and methods is essential. for this to be possible, organisations need to contribute to the evidence base on research evaluation. for example, this could be achieved by making data available that can be used for research on research, by participating in research on research, or by funding research on research. data sharing should be the minimum commitment, and data should be shared through an open infrastructure while respecting personal data protection. actions 10.1. several courses and dissemination sessions are being held to inform and prepare upv staff for the planned changes. 10.2. through its participation in the enhance alliance, the upv has been discussing and sharing experiences in joining the coalition and adopting its principles. in addition, the upv has been actively advocating for enhance members to join coara. this will be extended to the other alliances upv has (e.g. carpe) and other future alliances. 10.3. through various research structures (ingenio, imetricslab, ...), the upv develops several lines of research on the use of research metrics and new and improved research evaluation methods. 10.4. within the framework of the investigo programme, we are conducting a research project studying the national research evaluation system, which will lead to a selection of good practices and changes in our internal evaluation methods. temporality continuous commitment 15 the recommendations of the document support for coara signatories in preparing action plans have been considered when drafting this action plan. the coara 2024-2027 action plan was first drawn up by a small working group and contrasted, reviewed and validated by the research activity index monitoring and updating group. it has undergone a consultation and internal participation process and was approved by the r&d&i committee on x may 2024. 16
