coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) coara action plan 2024-2027 contents 1. background 2 1.1. context 2 1.2. research assessment at the uoc 4 2. action plan 2024-2027 5 2.1. underlying principles 5 2.2. proposed action plan 7 2.3. governance and monitoring 10 4 march 2024 coara action plan - uoc 2024-2027 1. background the universitat oberta de catalunya (uoc) has been a member of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) since its creation on 1 december 2022. part of the commitment to coara is the development of a four-year institutional action plan to fulfil the agreement on reforming research assessment, which was signed by the uoc when it joined coara in december 2022. this document describes the action plan that the uoc undertakes to carry out between 2024 and 2027, which was approved by the executive board on 4 march 2024, following a process of internal consultation and participation. the coara action plan 2024-2027 was first drafted by a small working group and then cross- checked, reviewed and validated. the recommendations provided in support for coara signatories in the preparation of action plans were taken into account when preparing this action plan. 1.1. context the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) was drafted during the 2012 annual meeting of the american society for cell biology in san francisco, in response to a call from the community to rethink the way research is assessed. dora's mission is to advance research assessment, and a fundamental tenet of its approach is that the journal's impact factor should not replace a qualitative assessment of the published work itself or of the individual contributions of researchers or their careers. dora is a global, cross-disciplinary initiative that has now been signed by more than 24,000 individuals and organizations (universities, research centres, funders, regulators, publishers, scientific societies, scholarly associations, etc.) from more than 160 countries. however, it is not the only initiative of its kind. others, such as the leiden manifesto for research metrics (2015) and the joint statement issued by the european university association (eua) and science europe (2019), have also expressed the urgency of a thorough review of the assessment of research careers, research projects and the institutions that carry them out. against this background, the european commission (ec) included a mandate to reform the research assessment system in its strategy, under action 3 of the european research area coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 2 policy agenda: overview of actions for the period 2022-2024 (2021). this mandate was initially accompanied by a scoping report on how to carry out this reform: towards a reform of the research assessment system: scoping report (2021). with the aim of improving the quality, performance and impact of european research, this report set out the principles on which assessment criteria and processes should be based: quality and impact, diversity, inclusion and collaboration. months later, after a broad participatory process, the ec published the institutional agreement of all organizations willing to actively participate in the reform: agreement on reforming research assessment (2022). on 1 december 2022, the coalition for the advancement of research assessment (coara) was formally established as an international european association comprising all signatory institutions (around 370). today, more than 640 organizations are members of coara, including universities, research centres and associations, research funding bodies, national and regional research assessment agencies, as well as scientific associations and academic staff. building on the discussions and consensus of the international community, coara aims to systemically reform research assessment and improve assessment practices through the application of common principles and clear commitments that should yield results in the coming years. during its first year of activity, coara's work was organized into groups dealing with specific topics (e.g. academic careers, infrastructure, multilingualism, and accountability metrics) and into national chapters. in spain, the spanish chapter was created under the leadership of the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca), the conference of rectors of spanish universities (crue) and the spanish national research council (csic), with the support of the ministry of universities and later the ministry of science, innovation and universities, and with the participation of more than 70 organizations, including the uoc. the spanish chapter has taken into account the contributions made in the national forum on reforming research assessment, 1 which met for the first and only time in january 2023 at the university of barcelona (ub). in 2023, notable contributions and regulatory changes were made to academic assessment in spain. firstly, the new organic law on the university system (losu) includes changes to the accreditation of teaching staff (later articulated in royal decree 678/2023) and specific criteria for the promotion of open science that quality assurance agencies must include in their assessments. secondly, one of the strategic objectives of the first national open science strategy (enca) 2023-2027 is the establishment of new research assessment mechanisms and a system of incentives and recognition to promote open science practices. aneca has created the committee for the review and monitoring of the national accreditation procedure in order to integrate these regulatory changes, adapt the current assessment system and fulfil the commitments made with dora and coara. 1 concept note (in spanish) coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 3 1.2. research assessment at the uoc as part of its open knowledge action plan, approved at the beginning of 2019 after a participatory process that lasted throughout 2018, the uoc is committed to the "transformation of research assessment towards a more qualitative system that ensures ongoing learning and transformation", highlighting this point as one of its main lines of action. the uoc's first action in this regard was to sign the dora and embody this issue in a specific action plan (2018), in order to set out its "commitment to the transformation of research assessment to a system that is more qualitative, transparent and fair, diverse and inclusive". the uoc was featured as a case study in the analysis produced by dora, together with the eua and sparc europe. the dora principles are also in line with initiatives already under way at the uoc, such as the human resources strategy for researchers (hrs4r) and the open, transparent and merit-based recruitment of researchers (otm-r). as a result of this commitment, the uoc has updated its internal research grant calls. this affects the recruitment of postdoctoral researchers, funding for research stays and interdisciplinary research awards. the journal's impact factor is no longer mandatory for assessing publications, and qualitative and contextual assessment items have been introduced relating to the scientific excellence of the article's content, its social impact or its interdisciplinary nature. in calls, scientific quality is expressed in a brief qualitative description of the applicant's career and research achievements. while citations and alternative metrics are allowed, they are not essential. consideration is also given to prominent positions in authors lists as part of responsible authorship practices. institutional fit, diversity of results beyond publications, and openness or compliance with the fair principles for data are also assessed. 2 subsequently, the uoc included research assessment reform in its strategic plan 2022-2025, specifically in the uoc insight section for the promotion of high-quality, transformative research. this took shape as the plan for the advancement of research assessment. in 2022, the uoc translated dora's space rubric, a tool for analysing the strengths and weaknesses of an institution's research assessment reform, into catalan and spanish. the uoc used this rubric as a questionnaire sent out to its research community. of the hundred or so responses received, almost half came from uoc research group leaders. the questionnaire allowed us to gather input from our teaching and research staff on the need to change our research assessment practices. this group emphasized the importance of recognizing the diversity of research outputs (merits, profiles, roles, careers, subject areas, etc.) and of using quantitative metrics more responsibly to provide more context where and when it is needed. as a university, we had two objectives: (1) to better understand what we were already doing, and (2) to look 2 llorenç arguimbau reviewed the progress made by the uoc in terms of research assessment for the period 2019-2022, and published his findings in uoc research calls (2019-2022): analysis of assessment according to the dora principles (in catalan) coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 4 closely at our current research assessment practices and our institutional readiness and capacity to assess research using alternative methods in line with the coara principles. the results of the questionnaire also painted a clear picture of the current climate in relation to our move towards research assessment reform. when considering such an important cultural and organizational change, it is imperative that the teaching and research staff are able to express their views, concerns, reservations and anxieties about the changes that coara is promoting. the results also show that many researchers already have considerable experience in alternative methods, although specific training and skill-building in this area are also needed, as well as greater transparency in the criteria of some internal calls and assessment tools, such as the uoc's internal pool of assessors. 2. action plan 2024-2027 2.1. underlying principles the action plan 2024-2027 is the first internal proposal to improve research assessment at the uoc, aiming to promote and support research of higher quality and impact, in line with the coara commitments. for this reason, it is based on the following principles: ● commitment to coara. all actions in the plan include commitments 1 to 4 of the coara agreement, which form the core of the reform proposal: 1. recognize the diversity of contributions to, and careers in, . 2. . 3. , . 4. avoid the use of rankings of research organizations in research assessment. ● principle of prudence. the regulatory changes introduced by the losu and royal decree 678/2023 are beginning to affect certain criteria for assessing teaching and research staff, and this is expected to continue to develop over the next few years. given that these changes will have to be incorporated, after due consideration, into the internal assessment processes for research staff, the actions of the action plan 2024- 2027 do not at this point include proposals related to the assessment of individual research activities of uoc teaching and research staff. however, this approach may be updated in the course of the plan's annual reviews. coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 5 ● principle of reality. instead, the focus will be on reviewing and improving the uoc's own competitive research-related calls, such as research projects or the selection of predoctoral and postdoctoral researchers, as well as on assessing research groups and units, in order to continue the work started years ago under the open knowledge action plan, the plan for the advancement of research assessment, and the in3 strategic plan. ● participation and internal debate. the involvement of stakeholders in the discussion, drafting, implementation and assessment of the plan is a key factor in the overall reform process. therefore, the people concerned and involved in these proposals will be included throughout the life of the plan, with particular emphasis on the following groups: ○ researchers at different stages of their careers. ○ research support staff (technicians, administrators, etc.). teaching and research staff from different disciplines and research backgrounds must also be involved, and the gender perspective must be incorporated in line with the current equality plan. ● assessment and continuous improvement. the timing of this plan coincides with the international reform movement that coara has been building since 2023, with the launch of its working groups and national chapters, and that the european commission has been driving with its policy agenda for 2022-2024. between 2024 and 2027, it is expected that good practices will be developed at catalan, national, european and international levels, which will feed into and inspire the proposals in this plan. for this reason, pilot actions, which will undergo assessment before being scaled up, are proposed. activities will also be carried out to enable the exchange of good practices, both within the organization and externally. coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 6 2.2. proposed action plan the priority actions of the uoc action plan 2024-2027 are summarized in the following table, which sets out the coara commitments, the related action lines, the actions included in these lines, the timeline and owner of each action, and the method of assessment. coara commitments action lines actions timeline owner assessment method 5. commit resources to preparation, action plan implementation and 2024-2027 coara committee meetings every six months and validation of reforming research implementation and update group (coara committee) the semi-annual and annual reports assessment as is needed monitoring of the annual monitoring: executive board; 2024-2027 coara committee presentation of the annual monitoring report to achieve the uoc's coara action research, innovation and knowledge organizational changes plan transfer committee; and academic committed to committee annual budget for the implementation 2024-2027 office of the deputy of the actions set out in the coara general manager for action plan 2024-2027 research and knowledge transfer 6. review and develop review and update of internal calls for research projects 2024-2027 research, innovation annual review by the coara committee of research assessment internal calls (criteria, and knowledge the published call (criteria and documents to criteria, tools and documents, guides for transfer committee be submitted) and an overall analysis of its processes applicants, (riktc) results from a coara perspective assessments, etc.) in research accelerator for internal calls 2024-2027 riktc coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 7 accordance with the internal calls for predoctoral and 2024-2027 riktc coara principles postdoctoral candidates assessment of the in3's research 2024-2027 riktc groups 7. raise awareness of internal strategy for open debate among uoc teaching 2024-2027 coara committee actions to promote academic debate research assessment popularizing the and research staff to disseminate the (meetings, seminars, webinars, etc.) reform and provide coara principles coara principles and discuss their transparent internal application at the uoc communication, guidance preparation of guides for the 2024-2027 coara committee guides for each of the adapted internal calls and training on presentation of coara-adapted assessment criteria and internal calls processes as well as their use strategy for the internal development of a designated 2024 technical secretariat communication plan communication of the communication plan for the action plan action plan implementation of the internal 2024-2027 technical secretariat internal communication actions communication actions set out in the communication plan implementation of the internal 2024-2027 technical secretariat external communication actions communication actions set out in the communication plan training on the coara training actions related to all research 2024-2027 technical secretariat annual training activities (at least one) principles assessment situations: research periods and accreditations, projects, etc. coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 8 8. exchange practices communication and participation in coara's general 2024-2027 coara committee annual summary of participation in coara and experiences to feedback with coara assembly enable mutual learning within and beyond coara 9. communicate progress made on adherence to the principles and participation in coara's spanish 2024-2027 coara committee annual summary of participation in the implementation of the chapter spanish chapter commitments participation in other coara working 2024-2027 coara committee annual summary of participation in working groups and committees or other groups and other coara spaces national or international research assessment groups 10. evaluate practices, monitoring of success running of pilot assessment projects 2024-2027 coara committee annual review by the coara committee criteria and tools based stories or innovative as a basis for testing and analysis on solid evidence and the assessment proposals publication of results state-of-the-art in research on research, coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 9 2.3. governance and monitoring the actions to reform research assessment are sponsored by xavier vilajosana, vice rector for research, knowledge transfer and entrepreneurship, and are implemented within the budget and objectives of the office of the deputy general manager for research and knowledge transfer. the coara action plan 2024-2027 was initially drawn up by a small working group coordinated by pastora martínez samper (office of the rector) and composed of julie wilson (faculty of economics and business), víctor garcia font (faculty of computer science, multimedia and telecommunications), israel rodríguez giralt (in3) and bego aguilera (office of the deputy general manager for research and knowledge transfer). the plan was also: ● shared and discussed with the members of the team working on the plan for the advancement of research assessment; ● opened for consultation with the uoc community in november and december 2023; ● reviewed and approved by the research, innovation and knowledge transfer committee on 23 november 2023; ● reviewed and approved by the faculty deans and research centre directors on 27 february 2024; and ● approved by the executive board on 4 march 2024. the coara action plan implementation and update group (i.e., coara committee) will be responsible for the annual implementation, monitoring and updating of the plan. the coara committee will build on the previous work of the team working on the plan for the advancement of research assessment and the working group that drew up the coara action plan. it is therefore composed of members of both groups, as well as of the teams responsible for certain actions in the plan (e.g., the office of the deputy general manager for research and knowledge transfer). the open science unit will act as the plan's technical secretariat. every six months, the plan's technical secretariat will present to the coara committee the details of the actions undertaken in collaboration with the faculties, research centres and doctoral school, as well as the relevant departments and units. during the following six months, all completed and planned actions will be reviewed. the actions of this plan will be reviewed every year by the coara committee, which may update or eliminate actions and include new ones according to the needs of the uoc. in addition, the annual report on activities and any changes to the plan must be submitted to the research, innovation and knowledge transfer committee, the academic committee and the executive board, as well as to coara. coara action plan (2024-2027) march 2024 10
