universitas studiorum fluminensis sveučilište u rijeci university of rijeka reform of research assessment – coara action plan 2024–2027 – rijeka, december 2023 introduction in the quest to recognise the diverse contributions of its constituents and staff to all the academic activities, thus contributing to the european initiatives of reforming the research assessment system, in the summer of 2022 the university of rijeka, croatia (uniri) was one of the early signatories of the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), hence officially joining the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) and endorsing the respective commitments. in this framework, uniri aims to reform the assessment of all academic activities, i.e., those including not merely research activities and outputs, but also teaching/supervision, leadership, community engagement and knowledge valorisation as well as societal (incl. cultural) and economic impact in general, and public outreach. in this document uniri lays down the activities it will implement in the short and medium timeframes to enhance its academic assessment approaches and practices. vision and mission in its strategy 2021–2025, uniri defines its vision of becoming a european university of the future and its mission to conduct scientific, artistic, and development research, engaging its staff: • as teachers, who prepare students for the jobs of the future and civic responsibility; • as researchers, who open and empower the university by boldly embarking on innovative research ventures and collaborations to develop the economy and improve the well-being of the local community; and • as citizens, who sincerely believe in the european values of freedom, human rights, and enlightenment, and are building a new european future; relying in this framework on the following values: • responsibility – we believe that institutional autonomy, academic integrity, academic freedom, and the pursuit of excellence and creativity in science and the arts are the prerequisites of authentic and quality achievements; • openness – we nurture curiosity, courage, inclusiveness, diversity, participation, and solidarity as necessary conditions for progressive and just institutions; • innovation – we recognize the importance of sustainable development, community engagement, education for the needs of the labour market and jobs of the future, and knowledge transfer as the pillars of social trust in academic institutions; • connection – we cooperate in and encourage all forms of international relationships to promote the european values of peace, enlightenment, and harmonious relations. uniri’s strategic objectives are defined herein in four strategic areas within which the respective quantitative and qualitative development goals are defined: • learning and teaching – promoting open education; • research – promoting innovation and the development of the economy and community; • regional involvement – promoting knowledge transfer and social responsibility for sustainable development; and • internationalization – promoting the continuous expansion of horizons and strategic partnerships, all within the overarching objectives of being internationally recognized as an open and modern european university that extends beyond the walls of institutions, research disciplines, and borders; one that continuously expands the horizons of sustainable development and development of competitive innovation ecosystems, and one that enhances all citizens’ quality of life and work while advancing the community’s resilience and well-being in cooperation with the local and regional government. the uniri research assessment reform action plan defined in this document is in line with these values and goals. current status the existing research assessment framework at uniri is bound chiefly by national legislation, in particular the renewed act on higher education and scientific activity adopted in october 2022, as well as the new act on quality assurance in higher education and science adopted in december 2022. this legal framework does provide a rather broad spectrum of elements for the assessment of research performing organisations (rpos – higher education institutions, i.e., universities, faculties, research institutes and universities of applied science) and researchers themselves. in fact, in line also with the provisions of the european association for quality assurance in higher education (enqa), the rpos are peer-reviewed assessed based on their: • internal structure, employees and strategies; • infrastructure and finances; • quality assurance system; • tracking and improvement of teaching; • scientific productivity; • professional work; • other activities. on the other hand, the academic staff is assessed based on national criteria for emloyment to scientific-teaching, artistic-teaching, research and teaching positions, which is still in course of revision, but it is in essence based on: • teaching contribution (number of teaching hours held, supervision of students and phds, co- authorships with supervised students, authored textbooks, innovation of teaching methods, review of teaching curricula, specialisations in teaching profession via international mobility, production of open teaching material, participation to life-long teaching activities, teaching in foreign languages); • research and professional contribution (number and ranking of authored publications, presentations of scientific publications and work, invited and keynote lectures, scientific books, open science practices, scientific and professional projects, editorial of scientific journals and proceedings, participation to organisation of scientific and professional conferences, peer-review activities, knowledge transfer projects and activities, innovations, outreach activities); • contribution to society and the institutional profile (leadership functions, institutional development projects, membership in international and national bodies, awards and similar). despite the quite exhaustive breadth of the above criteria, they are still based almost exclusively on quantitative metrics, and therefore fail to address the broadly established shortcomings in assessing, recognising, incentivising and rewarding the true quality and impact of all the diverse and multifaceted valuable contribution of the national rpos and the academic and other staff involved in all the various academic activities. with the aim of addressing these shortcomings, in the last few years the management of uniri has, therefore, strongly oriented its efforts towards promoting a cultural shift towards qualitative and socially accountable research assessment initiatives and approaches, with the resulting enhancement of responsible, equitable, transparent, efficient and sustainable assessment practices, promoting in this framework also open science measures. uniri has, in particular, actively joined and contributed to the following international commitments, guidelines, initiatives and projects: • the young universities for the future of europe (yufe) european university alliance, with its numerous activities related to research assessment, and in particular: - the partnership in the yufe transforming r&i through europe-wide knowledge transfer (yufering) horizon 2020 project, which co-created, within the project’s wp4, a joint yufe competence framework for researchers, whose elements, including candidates’ narrative cv, are already partly implemented in the yufe4postdocs project co-funded by the horizon europe’s marie sklodowska-curie programme; - the partnership in the developing and implementing hands-on training on open science and open innovation for early career researchers (diosi) horizon 2020 project that successfully developed measures and practices of enhancing the skills of doctoral students that will allow them to initiate entrepreneurial activities, as well as of acquiring knowledge on open science. • the young european research universities network (yerun), involved in various academic researcher assessment activities and initiatives. • uniri signed in 2021 the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora). • uniri is an early signatory of the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), thus joining in 2022 the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) and endorsing the respective commitments. currently uniri is actively involved and is contributing to two coara working groups (wgs), i.e., the wg on “reforming academic career assessment (aca)” and the wg “early-and-mid-career researchers (emcrs) – assessment and research culture”. • human researcher strategy for researchers (hrs4r): uniri was among the first european institutions that endorsed the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers, earning already in 2010 the hrs4r excellence in research logo. currently uniri is in the process of renewing this recognition, while aligning with the open, transparent and merit-based (otm-r) practices and the provision of the newly proposed charter for researchers, with its revised principles. • partnership in the open and universal science (opus) horizon europe project, whose main goal is to develop activities related to the reform of research assessment so as to enhance and promote the application of open science practices. in this framework, uniri is one of the rpos that will be piloting the proposed interventions, indicators and metrics. • partnership in the sustainable careers for researcher empowerment (secure) horizon europe project aiming at creating, trialling, implementing, and mainstreaming a research career framework to support organisations in the recruitment, employment, training, development, progression, and mobility of researchers, while improving research careers and reducing career precarity, where again uniri is one of the rpos piloting the proposed activities. in addition, uniri’s strong commitment and determination towards redefining its research assessment procedures and criteria is reflected in the following institutional documents, policies and practices: • the determinants of the strategy of the university of rijeka for the period from 2021 to 2025, where quantitative key performance indicators (kpis) are accompanied by qualitative ones. • uniri open science policy, developing on uniri’s early “declaration on open science” accepted already in january 2019 (as the first in croatia and one of the first in the eu), and adopted by the university senate in september 2021. • recommendations from the session of the uniri international scientific council of the university, held on november 15, 2021 (internal). • conclusions from the 4th joint thematic session of the uniri senate and the council of the university of rijeka on the topic “state and perspectives of the development of science at the university of rijeka" held on july 12, 2022 (internal), stressing, among others, the need to develop institutional career assessment criteria, a strong focus of this assessment on quality and the promotion of the flexibilization of the standardised working duties as well as open science practices. • guidelines for the additional (institutional) criteria for the selection of scientific-teaching, artistic-teaching, teaching, associate and professional staff at the university of rijeka and its constituents adopted by the uniri senate in september 2023. the herein set criteria, to be eventually adapted by each uniri constituent to the respective scientific discipline and its institutional strategies and policies, as well as to the career development stage of the single planned employment positions, recommends the introduction of narrative-based cvs and, under the assumption that any single researcher cannot excel in all the defined areas and practices, encompass the assessment of: - academic skills: quality of publications, knowledge of research methodologies, multi-, inter- and trans-disciplinarity in research activities, internationalisation, usage of open science principles and practices, teaching skills, management of research, peer review, financing, community engagement; - skills related to academic and institutional behaviour: professionalism, leadership, institutional policies, contributions to united nations’ sustainable development goals (sdgs) / european research area / european higher education area principles and actions, teamwork, communication skills; - personal qualities and skills: basic disciplinary knowledge, enthusiasm, persistence, integrity, self-confidence, responsibility, adaptability, conflict resolution, cognitive abilities, career development (incl. mobility), management of own resources, creativity, understanding of societal and cultural contexts. • in all the above activities, particular attention is dedicated to uniri’s early career researchers (ecrs - doctoral candidates and postdocs), so that uniri is also tailoring several specific ecr policies and practices such as: - establishment of the uniri doctoral school, functionally integrating and coordinating the activities of all the uniri doctoral study programs as well as promoting in this framework quality, interdisciplinarity and internationalisation as well as the development of transversal skills of the doctoral candidates; - specific criteria for the selection of ecr supervisors and the monitoring of their work (including feedback of the ecrs); - measures of monitoring and improving the success of ecrs' career progression. • what is more, in all its process, including those related to research assessment, uniri strongly fosters non-discrimination in any way on the basis of gender, age, ethnic, national or social origin, religion or belief, sexual orientation, language, disability, political opinion, social or economic condition (cf. the uniri code of ethics) and promotes gender equality. in fact, uniri is the first university in croatia to have adopted the gender equality plan 2021-2025, with one of the four strategic areas being gender equality in scientific and artistic research. in this framework uniri was part of the supporting and implementing plans for gender equality in academia and research (spear) horizon 2020 project and, through the activities coordinated by its gender equality council, developed, among others: - the recommendation for improving gender balance in appointments, the guidelines on gender inclusive communication, the a safe place without sexual harassment guidelines and the policy statement on the prevention of and protection against sexual harassment, - the guidelines for balancing business and private life of employed parents/carers at the university of rijeka, and the respective recommendations for ensuring the balance between professional and private life of working parents. it should be also emphasized that all uniri’s procedures are herein aligned not only with national, but also with international (ilo, eu, wef) regulations and policy documents. uniri policies are also part of and aligned with the yufe diversity and inclusivity strategy and the yerun 2021 - 2025 strategic plan entitled “enabling talent to grow”. • last but not least, uniri is also very active and contributes to the development of its research management capacities, especially those of the university centre for research and innovation, which encompasses also the recently established pre-award research support centre. in this framework it is very active in the earma european association of research managers and administrators, as well as in the associated bestprac network. key challenges besides the mentioned centralised national research and academic assessment system, that strongly influences and limits the institutional autonomy in a more pronounced quality- and impact-oriented reform of these fields, the key challenge is the fact that the uniri constituents, i.e., its faculties, are mostly legal entities on their own, whose self-sufficiency has been even strengthened by the above-mentioned new act on higher education and scientific activity. this means that at the university level only coordination and support measures and guidelines can be introduced, whereas their practical implementation at the constituents is ultimately voluntary. the below given actions and the respective timeframes are thus to be understood as those that will be fostered, incentivised and concerted via the instruments (including financial ones) at the disposal at the university level. the uniri management will herein also promote institutional capacity building and awareness raising, including the exchange of good practices with the various partner universities both nationally and internationally, but also among the uniri constituents. action plan based on the boundary conditions described above, uniri defines herein its actions to be performed towards quality-based, accountable as well as socially and economically impact-driven academic assessment, the connection with the respective coara commitments, the respective timeframes, and the responsible institutional actors. in the short term, many coherent and intertwined activities are hence planned to lead then, via the foreseen midterm activities, including iterative reviewing and revision phases, to gradual changes in the uniri institutional, project and individual academic staff and team assessment practices across all the institutional processes, having also in mind the evidenced nationally-defined framework. actions in the short term related coara commitments timeframe responsibility* (up to the end of 2024) vice-rector for publicly share this action plan on the uniri strategic projects website and via other uniri communication all q1 2024 and head of uniri channels r&i centre actively promote and advocate the uniri guidelines for the additional (institutional) criteria for the selection of scientific-teaching, 1. recognise the diversity of contributions artistic-teaching, teaching, associate and 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative uniri professional staff at the university of rijeka and evaluation management, its constituents as well as the related uniri 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, especially the vice- rulebook on scientific, artistic and innovation tools and processes continuously rector for strategic activities, thus further promoting academic 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent throughout 2024 projects and the assessment that is open, transparent, focused communication, guidance, and training vice-rector for on qualitative evaluation, ethical, respecting 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable science and arts equality and non-discrimination, based on mutual learning reliable data, and customized for various areas 9. communicate progress of science and arts, as well as the adaptable to the diverse needs of the uniri constituents 6. actively participate in the activities of the coara 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent vice-rector for wg on “reforming academic career assessment continuously communication, guidance, and training strategic projects (aca)”, especially as a pilot organisation filling in throughout 2024 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable and head of uniri and giving feedback on the survey within task / q1 2024 mutual learning r&i centre 1.1 mapping existing initiatives 9. communicate progress 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence, and make data openly available 1. recognise the diversity of contributions 2. 5. analyse the results of the gap analysis, revise 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, and update the respective action plan with clear tools and processes uniri timeframe and responsibilities and resubmit the 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent q1 2024 management application for the hrs4r excellence in research communication, guidance, and training logo 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning 9. communicate progress 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence, and make data openly available uniri management and 5. senate, uniri 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, centre for artificial adopt the uniri artificial intelligence policy tools and processes q1 2024 intelligence and 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid cybersecurity as evidence, and make data openly available well as newly appointed ai expert body uniri adopt the updated uniri regulations on 1. recognise the diversity of contributions q1 2024 / management and doctoral study programmes and support the 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, continuously senate, vice-rector activities of the uniri doctoral school tools and processes throughput 2024 for science and arts head of doctoral school with expert council of doctoral school 1. recognise the diversity of contributions pilot the elements of the yufe competence 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative framework for researchers, including the evaluation vice-rector for adoption of the narrative cvs, in the practical 5. science and arts execution of the employment of the 2nd cohort of 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, q2 2024 and centre for the yufe4postocs candidates, and exchange tools and processes science and arts experiences with the other partner universities 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable of the yufe european university alliance mutual learning 9. communicate progress 3. abandon inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based metrics 4. avoid the use of rankings of research organisations 5. 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, uniri university tools and processes library, especially revise and update the uniri open science 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent q2 2024 its centre for the policy communication, guidance, and training promotion of open 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable science (coz) mutual learning 9. communicate progress 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence, and make data openly available actively participate in and contribute to the 1. recognise the diversity of contributions uniri q2 2024 proposal of the national criteria for the 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, management emloyment to scientific-teaching, artistic- tools and processes (especially rector teaching, research and teaching positions 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid and vice-rector for evidence, and make data openly available strategic projects) and senate collect data and analyse the uniri results for the chosen cohort of ecrs according to the developed action plan in the opus he project 1. recognise the diversity of contributions uniri opus after the first interim evaluation of the chosen 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative working group interventions (encompassing policy, resources, evaluation coordinated by the repository, awareness raising and training 3. abandon inappropriate uses of journal- and vice-rector for interventions with respective risk mitigation and publication-based metrics strategic projects initial rewarding measures), as well as indicators 5. and with strong and metrics pertaining to: 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, involvement of the - the research category (subcategory of tools and processes q3 2024 uniri faculty of publications/ publication drafting): published 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent law, of the publications openly available, communication, guidance, and training university library - the education category (subcategory of skills/ 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable and especially skills development): open science skills mutual learning coz, as well as of certificates obtained, and 9. communicate progress the centre for - the valorisation category (subcategory of 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid science outreach communication/ public speaking): evidence, and make data openly available (socri) appearances openly available. define the uniri interventions, indicators and 1. recognise the diversity of contributions uniri secure metrics and develop the respective action plan 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative working group of piloting activities pertaining to the research evaluation q3 2024 coordinated by the career framework as well as to the tenure 5. vice-rector for track-like model as foreseen in the framework of 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, strategic projects the secure he project; start the respective tools and processes implementation 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent communication, guidance, and training 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning 9. communicate progress 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence, and make data openly available uniri university ensure access to suitable and easily accessible 5. library and national open science repositories and raise 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, q3 2024 university of rijeka awareness on the importance of open science tools and processes library system setup a fully functional uniri centre for science 5. outreach (socri) online digital platform, thus 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent providing a comprehensive online repository for communication, guidance, and training q3 2024 head of socri archiving of outreach activities (e.g. public 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid speaking appearances) as well as providing evidence, and make data openly available support and training in public outreach activities 6. 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent actively participate in and contribute to the vice-rector for communication, guidance, and training activities of the coara wg on “early-and-mid- continuously strategic projects 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable career researchers (emcrs) – assessment and throughout 2024 and head of uniri mutual learning research culture” r&i centre 9. communicate progress 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence, and make data openly available continue offering the trainings in open science 1. recognise the diversity of contributions continuously uniri university and open innovation piloted via the diosi 5. throughout 2024 library and project and other fora uniri is actively involved 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent university of rijeka in, focused especially to uniri ecrs, thus raising communication, guidance, and training library system as their level of skills in these transversal areas of well as science expertise and technology park step ri 2. with the involvement of the uniri doctoral 3. abandon inappropriate uses of journal- and school, develop training modules focused on vice-rector for publication-based metrics peer-review good practices and skills (especially science and arts, 5. professionalism, integrity and ethical continuously head of doctoral 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, considerations as well as bias avoidance), and throughout 2024 school with expert tools and processes promote means to actively engage, guide and council of doctoral 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent support ecrs in such trainings and the school communication, guidance, and training application of the thus acquired skills 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual learning take active part in and contribute to the activities of the yufe 2030 wp5 on responsible, vice-rector for interdisciplinary & inclusive research, and continuously strategic projects all especially the task 5.1 “research on responsible throughout 2024 and head of uniri research assessment and development of joint r&i centre policy framework” take active part in and contribute to the activities of the yerun wgs on academic continuously vice-rector for all careers, on coara, on open science and on throughout 2024 strategic projects knowledge valorisation continuously promote non-discrimination and 1. recognise the diversity of contributions continuously uniri gender gender equality in all assessment procedures 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, throughout 2024 equality council, tools and processes diversity officer 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid and other involved evidence, and make data openly available bodies involve and seek feedback on the planned and performed rra activities from the uniri university council, the international scientific council, the council for science, the expert continuously uniri rector and councils and other uniri expert committees, all throughout 2024 management also with the aim to identify means to actively involve the uniri research staff in rra and to incentivise, recognise and reward such involvement organise open science and phd career café’s, 1. recognise the diversity of contributions doctoral days and other similar awareness uniri university 5. continuously raising activities and events aimed at promoting library and head 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent throughout 2024 open science, ecrs’ transversal competencies of doctoral school communication, guidance, and training and rra in general take active part in and contribute to the activities of the international fora for research continuously uniri all assessment, as well as era, ehea, eua, earma throughout 2024 management and other policy fora continuously monitor the above activities and practices and transparently communicate on the continuously head of uniri r&i uniri website to the internal and external all throughout 2024 centre research communities and other stakeholders the progress on the rra * cf. the structure of the uniri management and of the decision-making, counselling and operative bodies provided on uniri.hr/en/about- university/structure/ midterm actions related coara commitments timeframe responsibility* (up to the end of 2027) monitor, review and update the activities described in the 2024 plan pertaining to: - the uniri non-discrimination, gender equality, open science, ai, outreach and other rra-related plans and policies; uniri - the ecrs-related activities of the uniri management doctoral school, university library, career (especially rector, counselling office and socri ; vice-rector for - the uniri guidelines for the additional strategic projects (institutional) criteria for the selection of … and head of uniri staff at the university of rijeka and its r&i centre) and constituents; senate, with - hrs4r and especially the otm-r practices continuously involvement of all and the new charter for researchers; throughout 2025 uniri university - uniri participation in the coara wgs on council, the “reforming academic career assessment international (aca)” and on “early-and-mid-career scientific council, researchers (emcrs) – assessment and the council for research culture”; science, the expert - the uniri application of the yufe councils and other competence framework for researchers and uniri expert the uniri participation in the yufe 2030 wp5 committees activities on responsible, interdisciplinary & inclusive research; - uniri participation in the yerun wgs on academic careers; - uniri active participation in and contribution to other international fora for research assessment, era, ehea, eua, earma, … 1. recognise the diversity of contributions uniri opus 2. base research assessment primarily on qualitative working group evaluation coordinated by the 3. abandon inappropriate uses of journal- and vice-rector for publication-based metrics strategic projects collect data and analyse the uniri results for the 5. and with strong chosen cohort of ecrs according to the 6. review and develop research assessment criteria, involvement of the developed action plan in the opus he project tools and processes q3 2025 uniri faculty of after the second and final interim evaluation of 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent law, of the the chosen interventions, indicators and metrics communication, guidance, and training university library as described for 2024 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable and especially mutual learning coz, as well as of 9. communicate progress the centre for 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid science outreach evidence, and make data openly available (socri) develop and implement, based on diosi, head of uniri yufering, opus and other project outcomes, as doctoral school 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent well as on internal best practices, uniri training with expert communication, guidance, and training material for ecrs supervisors with the focus on q3 2025 council of doctoral 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable ethics, networking, informing on counselling. school and uniri mutual learning organise respective events, thus enhancing career counselling mentoring quality and facilitating peer learning office develop and implement on the socri online 5. uniri opus q3 2025 digital platform a fully functional virtual socri, 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent working group offering instructions for university constituents communication, guidance, and training coordinated by the and academic staff on how to contribute to the 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable vice-rector for outreach repository, complemented by a mutual learning strategic projects, technical support system for video content 9. communicate progress head of centre for creation 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid science outreach evidence, and make data openly available (socri) monitoring and ensuring user satisfaction in 1. recognise the diversity of contributions ecrs career and personal counselling services head of uniri 7. raise awareness of reform and provide transparent piloted on a chosen group of doctoral doctoral school communication, guidance, and training candidates, as well as informing all uniri phd with expert 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable programs’ coordinators about career q4 2025 council of doctoral mutual learning counselling for doctoral candidates, thus school and uniri 9. communicate progress supporting ecrs in challenges during and after career counselling 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid their studies, but also in career management office evidence, and make data openly available and better readiness for job market produce a comprehensive interim evaluation report on the uniri rra activities outlined above vice-rector for and publicly share this report, as well as the strategic projects all end of 2025 revised version of this action plan, on the uniri and head of uniri website and via other uniri communication r&i centre channels uniri perform another iteration of monitoring, management reviewing and updating the uniri rra activities continuously (especially rector, specified in the revised action plan as defined all throughout 2026 vice-rector for the end of 2025. communicate regularly on the and 2027 strategic projects achieved progress and head of uniri r&i centre) and senate, with involvement of uniri university council, the international scientific council, the council for science, the expert councils and other uniri expert committees produce a comprehensive final 5-year evaluation vice-rector for report on the uniri rra activities and publicly strategic projects all end of 2027 share the resulting report on the uniri website and head of uniri and via other uniri communication channels r&i centre * cf. the structure of the uniri management and of the decision-making, counselling and operative bodies provided on uniri.hr/en/about- university/structure/ university of rijeka, croatia
