karlstad university coara action plan may 2024 karlstad university (kau), www.kau.se, is a mid-sized higher education institution based around two campuses in central sweden. as a former college, it was granted full university status in 1999. it currently provides around 70 degree programmes and 900 courses in arts, humanities, social studies, natural sciences, technology, teaching, and health care. at present, it has approximately 20,000 students and 1,300 employees. overall, kau’s research and education programmes have a broad scope, positioning the university well for engagement in successful collaborations with partners at the regional, national, and international levels. underlying kau’s long-term vision is a commitment to systematically promote sustainable social, economic, and environmental development. with this in mind, the university provides expertise in the utilisation of research and education in co-operation with a range of partners in wider society, from private industry to public bodies. karlstad university signed the agreement on reforming research assessment and joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) in may 2023. since then, the university has actively been raising awareness of the research assessment reform across the university. we hereby provide the kau initial coara action plan that all coara signatories are to submit after the first year of signing the agreement. kau aims to communicate progression annually and provide a conclusive report on adherence to the principles and implementation of the commitments by 2027. relevance of advancing research assessment for kau. as part of kau’s overarching quality assurance system (c2019/1027), the university is already committed to the topic of responsible research assessment by recognizing the use of qualitative measures in the internal monitoring of research and basing its periodic reviews of research on external peer-review assessments and the responsible use of quantitative indicators. in addition, kau actively engages in human resources strategy for researchers (hrs4r), a related initiative with the aim to align hr practices with european standards for researchers. kau will continue to appreciate the intricate diversity in research contributions and career development paths to ensure a fair and inclusive assessment environment. to harmonize its practices with the principles of responsible assessment upheld by coara, kau will prioritize and focus on the following areas during the period 2023-2027: 1. upholding the integrity and quality of research: this is achieved by acknowledge rigorous peer-review assessments. 2. recognizing collaborative practices: practices for collaboration with the surrounding society is seen as a key instrument for enhancing quality in both research and education. 3. endorsing open science practices: open science practices is recognized as a testament to quality in research and education. 4. advancing academic career assessments: the evaluation of academic careers is advanced by recognizing a broader and qualitative spectrum of merits. planned activities on the topic of advancing research assessment. as a starting point, the university aims to align with both national and international stakeholders in the same time as evolving local practices in research assessment. while possible more actions will be implemented over the coming years, kau has in its initial process of reflection identified the following actions to be performed to align with the coara principles: 1. actively participate in the national framework of the swedish national chapter chaired by the association of swedish higher education institutions (suhf). 2. kau representatives has joined the coara working groups: a) responsible metrics and indicators b) towards transformations: transdisciplinary, applied/practise-based, and impact 3. review kau research assessment practises in relation to the principles and core commitments of coara. this will involve: a) with the support of the overarching quality assurance system, develop an overview of the assessment processes of research or researchers at kau. b) when appropriate and in the light of the prioritization areas of kau, develop criteria, tools and procedures in line with the core commitments. 4. raise awareness of reforming research assessment. provide assesses and assessors the opportunity to understand and adopt to the new assessment principles and instructions. 5. in the light of coara, communicate international, national and institutional development on the kau website. karlstad university assessment reform roadmap 2023-2027. 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 signing the identify priority when appropriate, when appropriate, pilot reformed agreement on settings and key develop assessment develop assessment assessment reforming areas for kau in criteria, tools and criteria, tools and procedures research adherence to procedures in line procedures in line assessment coara with the core with the core commitments commitments joining coara kau coara promote the reform action plan of assessment by established guidelines and training raising awareness review kau communicate communicate communicate of coara at kau research progression by progression by progression by assessment seminars and on seminars and on seminars and on practises in relation the kau website the kau website the kau website to the principles and core commitments consider launch of the exchange best exchange best exchange best participation in swedish national practises and practises and practises and coara working chapter, chaired by experiences experiences experiences group’s suhf through networks through networks through networks linked to coara linked to coara linked to coara contact: legal representative, pro-vice-chancellor, professor margareta friman, margareta.friman@kau.se operational matters, research advisor, sofia andersson, sofia.andersson@kau.se 2
