reforming research assessment at health sciences university (uk): coara action plan 2024-2026 introduction to coara as part of the increasing interest in improving research cultures, there is a growing global movement to reform research assessment to maximises the quality and impact of research. the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) was established in 2022/23 to provide a platform for organisations across the world to work collectively to ensure that the assessment of research, researchers and research organisations recognises the diverse outputs, practices and activities that maximise the quality and impact of research. this requires basing assessment primarily on qualitative judgement, . the coara agreement on reforming research assessment is based on ten commitments that seek to establish a common direction for research assessment reform, while respecting organisations’ autonomy. the agreement sets a shared direction for changes in assessment practices for research, researchers and research performing organisations, with the overarching goal to maximise the quality and impact of research. the agreement includes the principles, commitments, and timeframe for reforms and lays out the principles for a coalition of organisations willing to work together in implementing the changes. hundreds of organisations globally have already signed the agreement. in the uk, 18 universities have signed it to date, alongside organisations and groups including uk research & innovation (ukri), jisc, the uk research integrity office (ukrio), the association of research manager & administrators, the wellcome trust, health data research uk, and the uk reproducibility network. a full list of signatories is available here: https://coara.eu/agreement/signatories/. introduction to coara at health sciences university in april 2024, health sciences university (hsu) became a signatory of coara. we committed to developing our coara action plan within 12 months of signing the agreement and are delighted to share this version publicly to demonstrate how we plan to align our policies, procedures and practices to the coara commitments. in summer 2024, we established the hsu coara working group to guide the university in aligning research assessment practices with the coara agreement. this includes developing, implementing, and overseeing plans, policies, and improvements to ensure the university adheres to the coara commitments. the coara working group has also assumed the role of the core team for hsu’s coara cascade boost project, for which an award was made in october 2024. the coara working group reports to the hsu research & innovation committee, which is overseen by the hsu academic board. this action plan was developed by the coara working group, with input from staff and postgraduate research students. drafts were presented to the research & innovation committee in january and march 2025, when the committee formally approved the action plan. the coara working group is chaired by the head of research. members include: head of people and development, library services manager, school & centre research leads, professor of musculoskeletal health & care, research & knowledge exchange manager, early career researcher representative, and postgraduate research student representative. the coara commitments by signing the agreement on reforming research assessment, the university subscribes to four core commitments and six supporting commitments. these are: core commitments 1. , 2. 3. , 4. supporting commitments 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. , coara cascade boost project in october 2024, we received confirmation that hsu had been awarded an institutional pilot project through the first round of the coara cascade boost call (funded by the eu). our project is titled: catalysing research assessment reform in a small and specialist university: reimagining our academic framework and evaluating its implementation in a revised academic performance review exercise. the project’s mission is to raise awareness of the importance of research assessment reform (rar) across the university, ensure our staff are upskilled in the latest innovations in academic career assessment (aca), actively engage a diverse group of staff in rar (including researchers at all career levels), and accelerate the pace of institutional change at our university. trhough the project, we are revising our academic framework (af) and associated criteria, tools and procedures and will test this the annual performance review exercise in 2025. an evaluation will take place of their efficacy, after which we will seek to embed them in other aca activities, e.g. recruitment and promotion. the project objectives are to: • develop the af to recognise a broader and more diverse range of contributions, activities and behaviours (including open science). • evaluate existing and design new tools and procedures to implement the revised af criteria in the annual performance review exercise, ensuring qualitative judgement at the heart of the process. • eradicate inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based metrics. • provide training and development to upskill staff. • design and implement and engagement and communication plan to raise internal awareness of coara, dora and rar. • widely promote and discuss lessons learned. monitoring the action plan the coara working group will meet frequently to progress the coara work at hsu. our action plan is a living document and will be updated regularly. progress will be reported formally to the research & innovation committee on an annual basis. queries any queries about the hsu coara action plan shuld be directed in the first instance to: research@aecc.ac.uk. © health sciences university, 2025 health sciences university (hsu) coara action plan (may 2024 to dec 2026, 20 months) part of coara no. commitment action award responsibility start end 1.1 develop and publish a hsu gender equality plan head of research adhering to the horizon europe gender equality plan and head of people guidance. partially & development dec-24 jul-25 1.2 develop and embed a hsu policy on responsible research metrics. head of research dec-24 jul-25 core commitment: 1.3 explore the uk technician's commitment and head of people & recognise the diversity of contributions consider how it could be embedded at hsu. development apr-26 jul-26 1 to, and careers, in research in 1.4 review the matrix in the academic framework to accordance with the needs and nature ensure it recognises a diverse and broad range of coara working of the research. research contributions. partially group jan-25 jan-26 1.5 explore opportunities to use the new hsu research library services repository to capture contributions to outputs. manager jan-25 jul-25 head of research, 1.6 review and update the hsu pgr student handbook, research & ke pgr annual monitoring process, induction, and guidance manager, and pgr for supervisory teams to ensure alignment to coara. coara rep apr-25 jul-25 2.1 after the first ref review exercise, evaluate hsu ref preparation framework and assessment processes to ensure that peer review and qualitative evaluation were the core assessment practices for the ref review exercises. ref working group sep-25 apr-26 2.2 deliver training for internal ref reviewers on undertaking peer review and assessment of outputs. head of research dec-24 dec-24 2.3 ensure that all internal ref reviewers have completed uoa leadership the online module on bias in research assessment. teams aug-24 dec-24 core commitment: for which peer 2.4 review the criteria, tools and processes for all 2 review is central, supported by internal rke funding competitions to ensure they align to responsible use of quantitative coara commitments and use peer review to assess indicators. applications and make funding decisions. rke manager jan-25 ongoing 2.5 embed a narrative cv approach in the head of research annual/interim review process, including delivery of and head of people training (see action 7.4). yes & development mar-24 sep-24 2.6 review the staff recruitment process in line with coara. consider implementing a statement/process around recruitment strategies for research-related roles head of people & and the primacy of qualitative evaluation. development jan-26 jul-26 head of research 2.7 improve the rke performance reports to ensure and professor of inclusion of appropriate qualitative and quantitative musculoskeletal information. health & care sep-24 ongoing core commitment: abandon inappropriate uses in research 3.1 review the application and decision-making assessment of journal-and publication- 3 processes for the open access fund. rke manager jan-25 jul-25 based metrics, in particular, inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h-index. 3.2 see action 1.2. core commitment: 4.1 work with marketing and communications to ensure 4 avoid the use of rankings for research the use of rankings is made with consideration of the organisations in research assessment. hsu policy on responsible research metrics. head of research sep-25 ongoing 5.1 establish the hsu coara working group as a coalition of internal stakeholders (including library, research office, hr), researchers (all career stages) and an coara working external advisor(s). group aug-24 ongoing commit resources to reform research 5.2 commit to ensuring the head of research and rke 5 assessment as needed to achieve the manager have dedicated time and support to engage in organisational changes committed to. the coara work, including the boost cascade project and the uk national chapter work. vice-chancellor may-24 ongoing 5.3 arrange for training on responsible research assessment for the coara working group. yes head of research dec-24 jan-25 health sciences university (hsu) coara action plan (may 2024 to dec 2026, 20 months) part of coara no. commitment action award responsibility start end 6.1 evaluate the existing criteria, tools and procedures (prps/pppps and academic framework), using the scope framework and the space rubric. engage the researcher community in this review, including the identification of options for developing existing and coara working creating new criteria, tools and procedures. yes group jan-25 feb-25 6.2 develop, design, pilot and evaluate a new approach review and develop research for the annual/interim performance review exercise, 6 assessment criteria, tools and processes. ensuring the new approach is fair, robust, transparent and consistent. engage the researcher community in this review, including the identification of options for developing existing and creating new criteria, tools and coara working procedures. yes group mar-25 apr-25 6.3 roll out the good practice from the pilot to the academic framework and associated processes, coara working including promotions and recruitment. group jan-26 aug-26 7.1 working with marketing & communications to develop and deliver a strong internal comms plan about our commitments to coara and dora and our work to coara working reform research assessment across the university. partially group nov-24 ongoing 7.2 use the coara guiding principles and questions to structure engagement sessions with staff to help head of research & raise awareness of research enhance the action plan. rke manager jan-25 ongoing assessment reform and provide 7.3 arrange training (including leadership development 7 transparent communication, guidance, and research-specific bias training) for evaluators and and training on assessment criteria and research leaders as part of the pilot of the new processes as well as their use. annual/interim review process. yes rke manager may-25 sep-25 7.4 arrange training for staff, e.g. on writing a narrative cv. yes rke manager may-25 sep-25 7.5 develop a plan to engage the hsu board of governors, executive leadership group, and wider management group in the coara work (for example, a coara working showcase event). group jun-25 ongoing 8.1 as a member of the uk national chapter, engage with its activities and promote membership to other head of research & institutions. rke manager may-24 ongoing exchange practices and experiences to 8.2 working with the other members of the uk national 8 enable mutual learning within and chapter, contribute to the work of the coara working beyond the coalition. groups and share that work with other chapter head of research & members. rke manager may-25 ongoing 8.3 engage with guildhe research and its members to promote and share experiences on the implementation head of research & of coara in small & specialist institutions. rke manager nov-24 ongoing 8.4 participate in the two coara boost workshops in head of research & 2025. yes rke manager may-25 dec-25 9.1 publish the hsu coara action plan on the university’s communicate progress made on website and zenodo, and update regularly with a 9 adherence to the principles and publicly visible rag status against each major action. head of research mar-25 ongoing implementation of the commitments. 9.2 . annually report on progress against the action plan to the hsu research & innovation committee. head of research aug-24 ongoing health sciences university (hsu) coara action plan (may 2024 to dec 2026, 20 months) part of coara no. commitment action award responsibility start end 10.1 see action 8.2. 10.2 participate in the people, culture & environment pilot exercise for ref 2029 and provide feedback on alignment to the coara principles, where appropriate. ref working group oct-24 may-25 evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the state- 10 of-the-art in research on research, and make data openly available for evidence- gathering and research. 10.3 regularly share good practice in academic career assessment with colleagues internally. yes head of research nov-24 jan-25 © health sciences university, 2025
