c oa l i t i o n f o r a dva n c i n g research assessment (coara) ac t i o n p l a n 2 023 - 2 02 8 introduction the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) was established in january 2022, and initiated a process for drafting an agreement for advancing research assessment processes. collaborative and collective discussions informed an agreement, which sets out a shared direction for changes in assessment processes for research and researchers. swansea university is committed to advancing research assessment and creating a culture of open, responsible and inclusive research and research assessment. our vice-chancellor professor paul boyle is a member of the coara steering group. we have been signatories for the concordat for researchers since its inception and signed the san francisco declaration of research assessment (dora) in 2018. these are embedded the principles within our research and innovation strategy (2020-2025). our approach to support for the research ecosystem, we are recognised by the science council for our technician commitment (tc), submitted in 2022 and our tc action plan (submitted and approved in 2023). in november 2022, swansea university joined coara as a signatory. in march 2024, we were delighted that swansea was announced as a co-lead for the uk chapter of the coara with strathclyde and loughborough universities and we look forward to hosting a future event at swansea in june 2024. in 2022 swansea university began an extensive review of its academic career pathways (acps) and research assessment. a key plank of this review has been to look at the use of metrics in the appointment, development and promotion process. the outcome of this review, which will be implemented from 2024, has been to make a number of key enhancements to our use of research assessment practices for research and innovation promotion pathways. the research criteria used in the new career pathways are closely aligned with the four modules of the ukri resumé for research and innovation (r4ri). previously the career pathways included a number of indicative performance levels associated with research, innovation, education and the student experience. we have removed the indicators from the promotion process and recognised this may have limited recognition of the diverse practices, activities and careers in research. in doing so, we have acknowledged that quantitative assessment using a narrow range of indicators focussed on a limited definition of success, does not capture the diversity of research activity at swansea, or the value researchers may add to peers, research groups or wider society. in december 2021 we appointed our first deputy pro-vice-chancellor for research culture, professor biagio lucini, with his successor, professor ian mabbett taking up the role from april 1st 2024. the dpvc is supported by the university’s research culture manager, dr anna seager. the university has developed a rc action and implementation plan which is aligned with the coara principles and aimed at enhancing our research culture. the following action plan details our current state of assessment and our proposed actions, based on the assessment position in 2024. coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan 2023-2028 2 principles and commitments action plan timescales for commitments actions activity launch 1 recognise the diversity 1.1 adopt a ukri r4ri style cv amendment to acps, including four themes ongoing of contributions to, and • contributions to the generation of new ideas, tools, careers in, research methodologies or knowledge in accordance with the needs and nature • the development of others and maintenance of effective of the research. working relationships • contributions to the wider research and innovation community • contributions to broader research/innovation-users and audiences and towards wider societal benefit also recognising research within collegiality and management to recognise responsible assessment of research, removing narrowly focussed kpis that reward narrow career progression. 1.2 progress the technician commitment action plan, with support of ongoing university people and culture committee (accepted in 2023) and supporting technical career development. 1.3 support contribution to and participation by our technicians in the 2024 wales innovation network technicians’ network. 1.4 review the biannual research and innovation awards planned for 2024 june 2024 for diversity of recognition. 1.5 launch an impact fellowships scheme to support staff to plan and 2024 develop the impact of their research. 2 base research 2.1 faculty research excellence officers and the university research ongoing assessment primarily on quality enhancement team provide training sessions on peer review qualitative evaluation of diverse outputs led by disciplinary experts. for which peer review is central, supported by responsible use of 2.2 recognise mentoring, coaching, research outputs and pre-bid 2024 quantitative indicators. peer review within the leadership and management component of acp assessments. 2.3 recognise contributions to researcher development within the 2024 leadership and management component of acp assessments. 2.4 develop and/or deliver training to increase recognition of open 2025 research and its value. 2.5 encourage, monitor and support the university’s open research 2025 policies through recognition within acp assessments. coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan 2023-2028 3 timescales for commitments actions activity launch 3 abandon inappropriate 3.1 provide guidance notes for applicants and external reviewers that 2024 uses in research reject inappropriate metrics for promotions. assessment of journal- and publication-based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of 3.2 develop a responsible research assessment policy to reduce the use ongoing journal impact factor of journal impact factors and h-index. (jif) and h-index. 3.3 ensure unconscious bias training is available to all assessors of 2024 research and researchers. 4 avoid the use of rankings 4.1 provide guidance for referees, external assessors and appointment 2024 of research organisations panels (within revised acp guidance) to explain highlight such in research assessment. rankings are not a ‘fair and rand that responsible’ assessment of research the criteria these rankings use should not trickle down to the evaluation of individual researchers. 5 commit resources to 5.1 continue to provide support to coordinate the research and 2024 reforming research innovation staff working group, and to engage those being assessed assessment as is with the development of the assessment process. needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to. 5.2 continue with our commitment with the support of the people 2024 and culture committee to review and update our academic career pathways. 5.3 ensure alignment with our equalities action plan and include impact 2024 assessment for proposed change. 5.4 enable and support the establishment of pilot promotions panels to 2024 evaluate revised acp criteria. 5.5 complete an evaluation of the implementation of acp aligned to 2025 the ukri joint users group (jfg)/ alternative users group (aug) shared evaluation framework. 5.6 act on feedback from each annual review to enhance and embed the ongoing new acp process successfully. 5.7 provide training and guidance on acp reform to researchers at all 2024 career stages, and to promotion panels. coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan 2023-2028 4 timescales for commitments actions activity launch 6 review and develop 6.1 faculty research excellence officers and the university research ongoing research assessment quality enhancement team provide training sessions on peer review criteria, tools and of diverse outputs and impacts led by disciplinary experts. processes. 6.2 establish a canvas-based series of resources that support qualitative 2024 assessment of diverse research outputs and impacts. 6.3 provide guidance on open research practices and the benefits of 2025 open research to all research assessors, research staff and students. 6.4 develop and/or deliver training to increase recognition of open 2025 research and its value. 6.5 revise acps to include recognition of trajectory, and hence future 2024 potential, alongside track record. 6.6 in applications for promotion consider requesting from researchers 2024 a portfolio of the applicant’s choice of evidence for achieving their research goals within an appropriate framework. 7 raise awareness of 7.1 communicate changes in assessments through academic ongoing research assessment career pathways to all staff who will be assessed and who reform and provide will undertake assessments. transparent communication, guidance, and training 7.2 establish a canvas-based series of resources that support qualitative 2024 on assessment criteria assessment of diverse research outputs and impacts. and processes as well as their use. coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan 2023-2028 5 timescales for commitments actions activity launch 8 exchange practices 8.1 join the national chapter of coara and participate fully in sharing 2024 and experiences to of best practise in research assessments. enable mutual learning within and beyond the coalition. 8.2 explore the potential for exchanging practices and experiences ongoing of research assessment with other universities e.g. unite partners through our strategic partnership with university grenoble alpes. 8.3 participate in exchange and sharing of experiences with other 2024 universities in wales, through the wales innovation network research culture team. 8.4 8contribute to uuk and ukri networks on career pathways and 2024 research assessment reform. 8.5 as ukrn member, develop a case study for dissemination 2025 on policies and approaches to improve recognition of open research practices. 9 communicate progress 9.1 publish coara action plan on university and coara webpages. 2024 made on adherence to the principles and implementation of 9.2 share with staff changes to acp aligned with coara. 2024 the commitments. 9.3 complete an evaluation of the implementation of acp aligned to 2025 the ukri joint users group (jfg)/ alternative users group (aug) shared evaluation framework. 9.4 act on feedback from each annual review to enhance and embed the ongoing new acp process successfully. 9.5 communicate progress made on coara action plan via acp 2025 assessment reform. 10 evaluate practices, 10.1 contribute to open research 4 case study project through 2025 criteria and tools based ukrn and evaluate our progress on research assessment of on solid evidence and open research practices. the state-of-the-art in research on research, and make data openly available for evidence 10.2 adopt ukri work on research assessment – shared evaluation 2025 gathering and research. framework to evaluate implementation of revised acp assessment. 10.3 evaluate the development of impact fellowship scheme for inclusivity 2025 on the diversity of participation. coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan 2023-2028 6
