1 university of helsinki coara action plan version 1.0 / 25 april 2024 introduction university of helsinki coara action plan describes the key actions the university is taking in order to align its responsible research and researcher assessment practices with agreement on reforming research assessment. the plan lists the commitments and actions as well as the key responsibilities and timeframe for development work. the plan is used for follow-up by relevant organisational bodies (e.g., scientific council, open science coordination group and vice-rector for research), and it is updated regularly based on the progress. the plan is shared openly according to the coara instructions. commitment scope action* timeframe 1. recognise the diversity of contributions changes in assessment practices should enable 1.1 implementation of the research 2023-2024 to, and careers in, research in recognition of the broad diversity of: data management implementation plan accordance with the needs and nature (research services, faculties) of the research • valuable contributions that researchers make to science and for the benefit of society, 1.2 applying for hr excellence in 2024/2025 → purpose: this commitment will broaden including diverse outputs beyond journal research (hrs4r) accreditation (hr, recognition of the diverse practices, publications and irrespective of the language research services, quality activities and careers in research, in which they are communicated; management) considering the specific nature of research • practices that contribute to the robustness, disciplines and other research endeavours. openness, transparency and the inclusiveness 1.3 establishing a working group on of research and the research process developing academic careers, chaired 2025 → including: peer review, teamwork and by vice-rector for research (hr, collaboration; research services) • activities including teaching, leadership, supervision, training and mentoring. 1.4 developing a responsible research 2024-2025 it is also important that assessment facilitates the assessment policy based on national recognition and valorisation of diverse roles and guidelines (research services, hr, careers in research, including: data steward, software library) engineer and data scientist roles, technical roles, university of helsinki / university services 2024 2 public outreach, science diplomacy, science advice and science communicator roles to name a few. it is recognised that current practice is often too narrow and limiting, so the goal cannot be to replace the narrow criteria we wish to move away from with different but equally narrow criteria. instead, the aim is to allow organisations to broaden the spectrum of what they value in research, while acknowledging that this may vary across disciplines and that each individual researcher should not be expected to contribute to all activities at once. 2. base research assessment primarily on research assessment should rely primarily on 2.1 updating the research assessment 2024 qualitative evaluation for which peer qualitative assessment for which peer review is of university of helsinki (rauh) review is central, supported by central, supported by responsibly used quantitative framework for the 2025 assessment responsible use of quantitative indicators where appropriate. peer review is the most round (research services, library) indicators robust method known for assessing quality and has the advantage that it is in the hands of the research 2.2 provide guidance and training on 2025 → purpose: this commitment will enable the community. it is important that peer review processes responsible use of bibliometric move towards research assessment criteria are designed to meet the fundamental principles of indicators (library, hr) that focus primarily on quality, while rigor and transparency: expert assessment, recognising that responsible use of transparency, impartiality, appropriateness, quantitative indicators can support confidentiality, integrity and ethical considerations, assessment where meaningful and relevant, gender, equality and diversity. to address the biases which is context dependent. and imperfections to which any method is prone, the research community re-assesses and improves peer review practices regularly. revised, or potentially new, criteria, tools and processes appropriate for assessing quality could be explored alongside peer review. moving towards assessment practices that rely more heavily on qualitative methods may require additional efforts from researchers. researchers should be recognised for these efforts and their university of helsinki / university services 2024 3 contributions to reviewing peers’ work should be valued as part of their career progression. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based 3.1 increase awareness of on-going assessment of journal- and publication- metrics in research assessment should be abandoned. inappropriate uses of journal- and commitment based metrics, in particular in particular, this means moving away from using publication-based metrics (see also inappropriate uses of journal impact metrics like the journal impact factor (jif), article action 1.2) (library) factor (jif) and h-index influence score (ais) and h-index as proxies for quality and impact. ‘inappropriate uses’ include: purpose: this commitment will reduce the dominance of a narrow set of quantitative • relying exclusively on author-based metrics journal- and publication-based metrics. (e.g. counting papers, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to assess quality and/or impact; • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, format or language; • relying on any other metrics that do not properly capture quality and/or impact. 4. avoid the use of rankings of research recognising that the international rankings most 4.1 benchmarking on the use of february 2024 organisations in research assessment often referred to by research organisations are rankings in research management in currently not ‘fair and responsible’, the criteria these partner universities (research purpose: this commitment will help avoid rankings use should not trickle down to the evaluation services) that metrics used by international rankings, of individual researchers, research teams and research which are inappropriate for assessing units. research organisations should also be mindful 4.2 consider joining the more than our on-going researchers, trickle down to research and that public communication (e.g. the active advertising rank initiative (uh leadership) commitment researcher assessment. it will help the of an institution’s rank) can contribute to the research community and research perception that research quality conflates with organisations regain the autonomy to ranking positions. shape assessment practices, rather than having to abide by criteria and where ranking approaches are deemed unavoidable, methodologies set by external commercial as may be the case in forms of evaluation beyond the companies. this could include retaining scope of this agreement such as benchmarking and control over ranking methodologies and performance reviews of countries or institutions, the data. methodological limitations of such approaches should be acknowledged, and institutions should avoid university of helsinki / university services 2024 4 trickle-down effects on research and researcher assessment. 5. commit resources to reforming resource allocation by assessment authorities and 5.1 connecting coara development to on-going research assessment as is needed to research funding and performing organisations is a the quality system of the university commitment achieve the organisational changes necessary condition for reforming assessment (operations management, research committed to practices. resources should be allocated as is needed services, hr, library) for each organisation to achieve the changes that will purpose: this commitment will ensure that enable adherence to the principles and to implement 5.2 developing the role of the open 2024 organisations allocate the necessary the commitments. this includes resources to: science coordination group in resources, whether in the form of budget or setting the goals and actions related staff capacity, to improve research • implement changes in research assessment, to open science (academic leaders, assessment practices within their agreed including planning and progress monitoring; research services) timeframe. • raise awareness among all actors; • educate, train and support researchers and 5.3 consider the changes needed in on-going any other staff involved in assessment, data collection and processing and commitment including peer-reviewers and assessors; and institutional research development • support the necessary infrastructure such as concerning responsible assessment tools and services for the transparent (research services) collection and processing of data on research assessment practices. particular attention should be paid to making resources available to enable the engagement of researchers at all career stages in reforming research assessment. 6. review and develop research criteria for the assessment of research performing 6.1.1 research assessment of the 2024-2026 assessment criteria, tools and processes units and organisations, including universities, university of helsinki (rauh) research centres, and research infrastructures, 2025 preparation, framework 6.1 criteria for units and institutions should be reviewed and adapted, and new criteria adjustment and with the direct involvement of research developed where needed, based on evidence. this implementation, follow-up organisations and researchers at all career should be done in close collaboration with assessors (rauh steering group, stages, review and develop criteria for and those that will be assessed, including research research services) assessing research units and research organisations and researchers. the changes should increase the ability to assess quality by enabling university of helsinki / university services 2024 5 performing organisations, while promoting recognition of all contributions to quality research by interoperability research units and institutions. such recognition includes that of early sharing of data and results, open purpose: this commitment will ensure that collaboration, teamwork; and consideration of national / regional / organisational contributions to the research ecosystem, knowledge authorities and evaluation agencies review generation and scientific, technological, economic, and, where needed, develop criteria for the cultural and societal impact. national / regional / assessment of research performing units organisational authorities and evaluation agencies and organisations, in accordance with the should coordinate to ensure their methodologies and principles. it will foster the responsible use processes are interoperable, while simultaneously of metrics in assessing research performing respecting the necessary adaptation to each context. units and organisations, and help to prevent contradictions or incompatibilities between the assessment of research, researchers and research performing organisations. it will also safeguard the interoperability of adapted or newly developed assessment processes. 6.2 criteria for projects and criteria, tools and processes should be reviewed and 6.2.1 see 2.1 hr excellence in 2024 researchers developed together with researchers in different research (hrs4r) accreditation disciplines and at different career stages; and should (hr) with the direct involvement of researchers enable recognition of the diversity of research at all career stages, review and develop activities and practices that contribute to research on-going criteria, tools and processes for the quality, including diverse outputs in different 6.2.2 continue of evaluating the commitment assessment of research projects, research languages. this should increase the ability to assess practices and develop criteria, teams and researchers that are adapted to quality by enabling recognition of all contributions to tools and processes for the their context of application quality research from research projects and by assessment of researchers in all researchers and research teams. this includes career levels. (hr) purpose: this commitment will enable recognition of early sharing of data and results, open recognition of the diverse research collaboration, and teamwork. reformed practices for activities and practices through the revision assessing individual researchers should consider and development of assessment criteria, future potential alongside track record and take into tools, and processes. it will ensure that account researchers’ individual contexts and careers. university of helsinki / university services 2024 6 organisations review their processes and they should also recognise that researchers cannot make tangible changes by developing excel in all types of tasks and provide for a framework existing or new assessment approaches, that allows researchers to contribute to the definition individually or in collaboration with others, of their research goals and aspirations. research in accordance with the principles. assessment by research funders should consider disciplinary, multi-, inter-, and trans-disciplinary research as well as contributions to knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact. 7 raise awareness of research without widespread awareness of the reform and 7.1 raising awareness of the on-going assessment reform and provide training of those assessed and, crucially, assessors, commitment to responsible commitment transparent communication, guidance, progress will be slow – if not impossible. evaluation and action on uh at all and training on assessment criteria and organisations should be clear and transparent about levels through communication, processes as well as their use assessment processes and the tools and criteria they information sharing and training use. they should make guidance on their assessment (e.g., internal and external purpose: this commitment will ensure that approaches openly available and train those involved communication of the action plan, organisations raise awareness of the reform in the assessment process. they should allow those in researcher training, recruitment among all actors. it will ensure that assessed to have access to the criteria, data and processes, induction of the organisations transparently communicate reviews or deliberation outcomes used in their reviewers etc.) the criteria, tools and processes used for assessment within the limits of confidentiality. research assessment and train researchers particular attention should be paid to raising and assessors in their use. awareness among researchers at all career stages. 8 exchange practices and experiences to while respecting each other’s autonomy, 8.1 active participation to the national on-going enable mutual learning within and organisations should share practices and experiences chapter of coara in finland beyond the coalition to facilitate mutual learning. this exchange should (research services, hr?) include contributing to the development of guidance purpose: this commitment will ensure and common approaches in order to minimise 8.2 active participation and joint organisations exchange and make use of contradictions or incompatibilities between the development via finn-arma on-going information for mutual learning. it will help assessment practices used by different organisations. groups, and open science national avoid fragmentation, contribute to the it should also include sharing of lessons learned to coordination (research services, coherence of assessment practices between ensure continuous mutual improvements. library) organisations, and enable researcher mobility. it also will allow those further university of helsinki / university services 2024 7 ahead to share approaches and lessons 8.3 explore the possibilities of coara on-going learned, to benefit those who have further working groups (research services, to go on their reform journey. hr, library) 9 communicate progress made on demonstrating progress made towards implementing 9.1 publish our coara action plan on spring 2024 adherence to the principles and the commitments and adherence to the principles is the uh web pages once approved implementation of the commitments an important part of this initiative. organisations (research services) should commit to regularly update each other and purpose: this commitment will ensure their communities on their adherence and progress. 9.2 annually follow-up on progress via on-going organisations update one another on the this process involves being open to scrutiny from their the action plan and update it as progress made. it will foster careful self- own communities, sharing successes as well as necessary (research services) reflection and monitoring of their own challenges, and communicating their experiences to adherence to the principles and progress facilitate collective progress. towards meeting the commitments. 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools growing evidence shows that current assessment 10.1 develop institutional research on-going based on solid evidence and the state- processes that rely on publication- and journal-based related to processes concerning of-the-art in research on research, and metrics are prone to multiple biases. as approaches coara (institutional research and make data openly available for using more qualitative research assessment are analysis, research services) evidence gathering and research piloted by several organisations (e.g. narrative and evidence-based cvs, new assessment frameworks and purpose: this commitment will ensure that indicators), it is important to evaluate and monitor assessment approach decisions are their impact based on evidence and rigorous evidence informed. it will help methods. organisations should contribute to the organisations reflect on their own evidence base on research assessment in order to processes, gain understanding about make this possible. for example, it could be achieved whether assessment practices achieve the by making data that can be used for research on desired goals, and engage in evolutive research available, by participating in research on assessment based on new evidence as it research, or by funding research on research. data becomes available. it will also help to sharing should be the minimum commitment and data ensure control and ownership of research should be shared through open infrastructure, while assessment data by the research respecting personal data protection. community. university of helsinki / university services 2024
