1 ku leuven coara action plan 2023-2027 version 1.0 / november 2024 the coara action plan of ku leuven (belgium) describes the actions the university has taken/is taking to align its research(er) assessment practices with the agreement on reforming research assessment. conform the coara-membership policy, the plan is shared openly. for some actions we have included initiatives predating membership of coara, as they provide a context for initiatives taken more recently. the action plan has been approved by, and will be updated by the university’s open science task force and the vice-rector for research policy. contact person: hannelore vanhaverbeke commitment scope action* timeframe 1. recognise the diversity of changes in assessment practices should past activities paving the way for current projects: contributions to, and careers in, enable recognition of the broad diversity of: research in accordance with the ku leuven established its open science task force in (2019) needs and nature of the • valuable contributions that 2019 to coordinate efforts in promoting and sustaining research researchers make to science and for open science. operating under the umbrella of this the benefit of society, including taskforce is the working group “impact on hr policy and purpose: this commitment will diverse outputs beyond journal excellence”. this wg is led by the head of hr and the broaden recognition of the diverse publications and irrespective of the head of the research office. its primary aim is to evaluate practices, activities and careers in language in which they are current assessment practices for their alignment with research, considering the specific communicated; new insights, including open science, the role of metrics, nature of research disciplines and • practices that contribute to the team science, and the diversity of career paths in other research endeavours. robustness, openness, transparency academia. and the inclusiveness of research and the research process including: already in 2018, ku leuven introduced the biosketch in (2018) peer review, teamwork and hiring and promotion procedures for senior academics, collaboration; enabling staff to emphasize what they deem relevant in • activities including teaching, the fields of research, education and engagement. leadership, supervision, similarly, exhaustive publication lists were abandoned in training and mentoring. favour of an overview of a maximum of five realisations chosen by the applicant, with guidance suggesting the inclusion of outputs other than journal articles (datasets, 2 it is also important that assessment facilitates valorization activities, a mooc, a citizen science project the recognition and valorisation of diverse etc.). roles and careers in research, including: data steward, software engineer and data scientist in 2020, valuable bottom-up feedback from the research (2020) roles, technical roles, public outreach, science policy council, an independent body consisting of diplomacy, science advice and science department heads and vice deans of research, relating to communicator roles to name a few. the role of open science in the assessment of research(ers), was included in promotion procedures. it is recognised that current practice is often too narrow and limiting, so the goal cannot ku leuven was a driving force behind the 2020 leru (2020) be to replace the narrow criteria we wish to paper a pathway towards multidimensional academic move away from with different but equally careers. a leru framework for the assessment of narrow criteria. instead, the aim is to allow researchers, authored by bert overlaet, former head of organisations to broaden the spectrum of the hr department and member of the working group what they value in research, while “impact on hr policy and excellence”. acknowledging that this may vary across disciplines and that each individual the university obtained the european hr excellence in (2022) researcher should not be expected to research (hrs4r) accreditation in 2022 based on its contribute to all activities at once. current policy and a comprehensive action plan, including a focus on open science in the evaluation of researchers. ku leuven signed the agreement on reforming research (2022) assessment and became a member of coara in 2022. more recently the open science wg “impact on hr 2022-2024 policy and excellence” has been working in close collaboration with hr on a new framework for recognising and valuing high-quality academic work. academic leadership, teamwork, development & innovation, and sharing knowledge are considered dimensions that should be addressed in hiring and promotion procedures or in the allocation of research project funding. this framework was validated by all academics acting as evaluator and approved by the executive board, and is now broadly communicated. 3 the next stage will be to provide guidance on how to 2024- evaluate these dimensions, taking into account discipline, career stage and career path (cf. section 6.2). currently the wg “impact on hr policy and excellence” 2023- is focusing on promoting and evaluating team science. ku leuven wishes to stress that working in a team and contributing to team efforts is as important as individual performance, excellence or impact. parallel to this 2023- initiative, the five flemish universities (supported by the flemish interuniversity council – vlir) cooperate in drafting a framework and assessment guide for the evaluation of teams. both projects explicitly acknowledge the importance of all roles, including ‘supporting’ roles such as science communication, datamanagement, lab technicians, clinical staff that may constitute a successful team. specifically for young researchers, ku leuven offers exhaustive training and coaching, focusing, among other things, on the importance of diversity in research teams, and on the diverse potential career paths for young researchers. these initiatives help to shape young researchers’ mindset, and help them to recognize the need and value of diverse contributions and careers in research. these initiatives enable(d) a more diverse pool of applications, respecting individual choices, including non-traditional career paths, and discipline-specific performance. 2. base research assessment research assessment should rely primarily the initiatives listed under section 1 emphasize that the continuous primarily on qualitative on qualitative assessment for which peer evaluation of research and researchers, both at the monitoring evaluation for which peer review is central, supported by responsibly individual and team level, is primarily based on peer review is central, supported by used quantitative indicators where review, using tools such as a narrative cv, biosketch, appropriate. peer review is the most robust and/or project description 4 responsible use of quantitative method known for assessing quality and has indicators the advantage that it is in the hands of the while ku leuven reports on bibliometric indicators (cf. continuous research community. section 3), the primary role of peer review is stressed in monitoring purpose: this commitment will enable the guidance accompanying all briefing material. the move towards research assessment it is important that peer review processes are additionally, the (multi-disciplinary) assessment panels criteria that focus primarily on quality, designed to meet the fundamental principles function as self-regulatory mechanisms to prevent while recognising that responsible use of rigor and transparency: expert uninformed use of any metrics. of quantitative indicators can support assessment, transparency, impartiality, assessment where meaningful and appropriateness, confidentiality, integrity by organizing training courses for all members of our continuous relevant, which is context dependent. and ethical considerations, gender, equality selection and assessment committees, we aim to monitoring and diversity. strengthen the selection and decision-making to address the biases and imperfections to competencies of these committee members, thus which any method is prone, the research substantiating the decision made. they learn how to community re-assesses and improves peer avoid the pitfalls of conflicts of interest, how to be aware review practices regularly. revised, or of (implicit) biases and group dynamics, and feel potentially new, criteria, tools and processes empowered to provide feedback based on good appropriate for assessing quality could be practices and discussions about cases. explored alongside peer review. moving towards assessment practices that being member or chair of an assessment committee is rely more heavily on qualitative methods taken into account as an explicit part of the engagement may require additional efforts from dimension in the ku leuven assessment framework. researchers. researchers should be recognised for these efforts and their further actions are outlined in section 3. contributions to reviewing peers’ work should be valued as part of their career progression. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in inappropriate uses of journal- and in 2022, ku leuven developed a policy on the responsible (2022) research assessment of journal- publication-based metrics in research use of metrics in research assessment with explicit and publication- based metrics, assessment should be abandoned. in references to the san francisco declaration on research in particular inappropriate uses particular, this means moving away from assessment, the leiden manifesto for research metrics, of journal impact factor (jif) using metrics like the journal impact factor and the hong kong principles for assessing researchers. and h-index (jif), article influence score (ais) and h- evaluators and the evaluated are encouraged to consult index as proxies for quality and impact. practical guidelines and a checklist to assess the purpose: this commitment will ‘inappropriate uses’ include: appropriateness of metrics they use or that are being reduce the dominance of a narrow • relying exclusively on author-based used in an assessment procedure. attention is drawn to metrics (e.g. counting papers, 5 set of quantitative journal- and patents, citations, grants, etc.) to discipline-specific indicators and the need for publication-based metrics. assess quality and/or impact; normalization. • assessing outputs based on metrics relating to publication venue, format the recently published leru paper on next-generation 2024 or language; metrics for scientific and scholarly research in europe relying on any other metrics that do not was co-authored by a ku leuven scientometric expert, properly capture quality and/or impact. koenraad debackere, and serves as a baseline against which the current use of metrics and rankings at the university is evaluated. a draft action plan is in 2024- preparation for debate amongst policymakers. broad training in the form of webinars and hands-on info 2024- sessions is being developed, aimed at understanding the responsible use of metrics, and how to use metrics to support a personal cv, with specific guidance tailored for early career researchers. 4. avoid the use of rankings of recognising that the international rankings rankings are not used as indicators in the evaluation of continuous research organisations in most often referred to by research researchers at ku leuven because of their problematic monitoring research assessment organisations are currently not ‘fair and nature. whenever ranking data are requested at higher responsible’, the criteria these rankings use levels of aggregation, the research office systematically purpose: this commitment will help should not trickle down to the evaluation of includes a disclaimer pointing out the severe limitations avoid that metrics used by individual researchers, research teams and of the methodology in substantiating certain claims. international rankings, which are research units. research organisations should higher management is also made aware of these issues. inappropriate for assessing also be mindful that public communication researchers, trickle down to research (e.g. the active advertising of an institution’s a website with more detailed info on why not to use 2024 and researcher assessment. it will rank) can contribute to the perception that rankings as a kpi is in the making. help the research community and research quality conflates with ranking research organisations regain the positions. autonomy to shape assessment where ranking approaches are deemed practices, rather than having to abide unavoidable, as may be the case in forms of by criteria and methodologies set by evaluation beyond the scope of this external commercial companies. this agreement such as benchmarking and could include retaining control over performance reviews of countries or ranking methodologies and data. institutions, the methodological limitations of such approaches should be acknowledged, and institutions should avoid trickle-down 6 effects on research and researcher assessment. 5. commit resources to resource allocation by assessment both higher management officials and researchers, as reforming research assessment authorities and research funding and well as research support staff, make up the working as is needed to achieve the performing organisations is a necessary group “impact on hr policy and excellence” referred to organisational changes condition for reforming assessment in section 1. committed to practices. resources should be allocated as is needed for each organisation to achieve the staff at the hr office and the research office jointly purpose: this commitment will changes that will enable adherence to the support the necessary pilots, policy drafts, and ensure that organisations allocate principles and to implement the development of infrastructure (in collaboration with it the necessary resources, whether in commitments. this includes resources to: services) to provide a sound basis for any reform in the form of budget or staff capacity, research assessment. this is done alongside training to improve research assessment • implement changes in research and guidelines for researchers and evaluators on how practices within their agreed assessment, including planning and to use indicators and metrics in a responsible way. timeframe. progress monitoring; training courses by external consultants are • raise awareness among all actors; occasionally organized for the members of evaluating • educate, train and support councils (e.g. on implicit bias in evaluation processes). researchers and any other staff involved in assessment, including the efforts of researchers who are members or chairs of peer-reviewers and assessors; and an assessment committees are being taken into account • support the necessary infrastructure as an explicit part of the engagement dimension in the such as tools and services for the ku leuven assessment framework, thus supporting the transparent collection and continued engagement of these necessary roles. processing of data on research assessment practices. input for and validation of the new framework for recognising and valuing high-quality academic work particular attention should be paid to making have been extensively solicited by hr, addressing all resources available to enable the boards of assessment and asking explicit feedback from engagement of researchers at all career the researchers attending the 2023 edition of the ku stages in reforming research assessment. leuven open science day. 7 6. 6.1 criteria for units and institutions criteria for the assessment of research the evaluating councils at ku leuven annually review continuous with the direct involvement of performing units and organisations, the guidelines and procedures for all internal funding monitoring research organisations and including universities, research centres, and categories of internal funds, which allows for the researchers at all career stages, research infrastructures, should be integration of new views and best practices. over the review and develop criteria for reviewed and adapted, and new criteria last decade, a clear shift has been seen from merely assessing research units and developed where needed, based on quantitative selection criteria towards much more research performing organisations, evidence. this should be done in close qualitative assessments. this is evident from the while promoting interoperability collaboration with assessors and those that material applicants have to provide (bio-sketch, will be assessed, including research interpretation of research time, possibility to explain purpose: this commitment will organisations and researchers. the changes periods of less activity, etc.) and from how the ensure that national / regional / should selection criteria include new elements (quality of organisational authorities and increase the ability to assess quality by guidance of doctoral students, policy towards evaluation agencies review and, enabling recognition of all contributions to postdoctoral researchers, gender, etc.). where needed, develop criteria for quality research by research units and the assessment of research institutions. such recognition includes that of the ku leuven institutes, the first of which were continuous performing units and organisations, early sharing of data and results, open established in 2019, carry out interdisciplinary research monitoring in accordance with the principles. it collaboration, teamwork; and consideration with a societal relevance. they focus on subjects that will foster the responsible use of of contributions to the research ecosystem, remain important in the long term and rely on an metrics in assessing research knowledge generation and scientific, extensive and interdisciplinary network. institutes are performing units and organisations, technological, economic, cultural and societal evaluated every 4 years by an external assessment and help to prevent contradictions impact. committee. criteria for evaluation are mainly or incompatibilities between the qualitative and largely determined by the institute assessment of research, researchers national / regional / organisational itself based on its mission. quantitative data can be and research performing authorities and evaluation agencies should used to support claims. feedback from these organisations. it will also safeguard coordinate to ensure their methodologies evaluations feed into central services to gauge whether the interoperability of adapted or and processes are interoperable, while kpis can be drafted at the central level. when drafting newly developed assessment simultaneously respecting the necessary a kpi, explicit feedback from the members of the processes. adaptation to each context. institute is solicited to guarantee relevance and methodological soundness. 8 as stated in section 1, ku leuven promotes team 2023- science. teams can be small organizational units, but also ad-hoc collaborations across the organizational chart. currently, a vision text is being drafted for agreement by the executive board. in parallel, based on feedback from experts in team science and academics across all career stages, guidance on how to evaluate team science will be developed, and communicated to assessment & hiring boards. at the flemish level, all five universities collaborate on 2023- guidance for funders to evaluate research teams and team science. 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers with the direct involvement of criteria, tools and processes should be the new framework for recognising and valuing high- 2022-2024 researchers at all career stages, reviewed and developed together with quality academic work referred to in section 1 was review and develop criteria, tools researchers in different disciplines and at developed in close collaboration with academic staff, and processes for the assessment of different career stages; and should enable both in the role of evaluators and those being evaluated. research projects, research teams recognition of the diversity of research several iterative consultations resulted in a framework and researchers that are adapted to activities and practices that contribute to fully supported by the community. this framework their context of application research quality, including diverse outputs in stresses four dimensions: academic leadership, different languages. this should increase the teamwork, development & innovation, and knowledge purpose: this commitment will enable ability to assess quality by enabling sharing, taking into account personal circumstances (life recognition of the diverse research recognition of all contributions to quality choices, periods of absence, etc.), disciplinary activities and practices through the research from research projects and by background, career stage, and career path. revision and development of researchers and research teams. this assessment criteria, tools, and includes recognition of early sharing of data as a next stage in this reform the working group “impact 2024- processes. it will ensure that and results, open collaboration, and on hr policy and excellence” will examine activities and organisations review their processes teamwork. indicators that can serve as guidance or inspiration for and make tangible changes by reformed practices for assessing individual researchers in their pursuit of academic research, developing existing or new researchers should consider future potential education & engagement, or to highlight during assessment approaches, individually alongside track record and take into assessment. the outcome of this analysis will be or in collaboration with others, in account researchers’ individual contexts and discussed with policy bodies, evaluation councils, and accordance with the principles. careers. 9 groups of researchers to ensure support from the they should also recognise that researchers academic community. cannot excel in all types of tasks and provide the results will subsequently be incorporated into the for a framework that allows researchers to templates used by hr or evaluation councils for the contribute to the definition of their research evaluation of research(ers), in collaboration with it- goals and aspirations. research assessment services. by research funders should consider disciplinary, multi-, inter-, and trans- both in the new framework and in the current draft of disciplinary research as well as contributions the ku leuven vision text on team science, it is made to knowledge generation and scientific, abundantly clear that academics cannot excel in all technological, economic, tasks at the same time. room is made for individual cultural and societal impact. career choices, and working in teams is encouraged to ensure high quality work as a group, where roles and foci can be shifted among the team members. the internal regulations for the evaluating councils at ku leuven stress the following important element for the composition of the councils: “diversity in the composition is important, both in respect of academic seniority and of the scale and established character of the research group(s) to which the members belong”. for the internal evaluation of research applications on strategic basic research and applied research with economic/societal valorisation potential, the evaluating council consists of both academic personnel and people from the industry/societal actors to offer a broad evaluation of both the scientific work plan of the project and the valorisation potential. ku leuven continually strives to optimize and update its policy and regulatory framework for doctoral researchers, in which intermediate and final evaluation of doctoral researchers plays a key role. the ambition is to offer all stakeholders in the doctoral process maximum transparency of doctoral procedures in all 10 stages and under all circumstances and to include comprehensive monitoring systems for consistent compliance with regulatory procedures. 7 raise awareness of research without widespread awareness of the for the internal evaluation of research(ers) and assessment reform and provide reform and training of those assessed and, research applications within ku leuven internal funds, transparent communication, crucially, assessors, progress will be slow – an exhaustive overview of the criteria and indicators guidance, and training on if not impossible. used, explaining the rationale behind their use and the assessment criteria and organisations should be clear and source of these data, can be consulted by all academic processes as well as their use transparent about assessment processes staff. and the tools and criteria they use. they purpose: this commitment will should make guidance on their assessment evaluation procedures for external applicants are 2024- ensure that organisations raise approaches openly available and train those publicly available on the university’s website. awareness of the reform among all involved in the assessment process. they these criteria and indicators will be revised because of actors. it will ensure that should allow those assessed to have access the new framework for assessing research(er)s (cf. organisations transparently to the criteria, data and reviews or section 6.1). communicate the criteria, tools and deliberation outcomes used in their processes used for research assessment within the limits of as referred to in section 3, training in the form of 2024- assessment and train researchers confidentiality. webinars and hands-on info sessions is being and assessors in their use. particular attention should be paid to raising developed, aimed both at understanding what awareness among researchers at all career responsible use of metrics entails, and how to use stages. metrics to support a personal cv correctly, particularly focused on early career researchers. 8 exchange practices and while respecting each other’s autonomy, ku leuven is an active member of diverse collaboration experiences to enable mutual organisations should share practices and networks, such as leru and una europa. within leru, learning within and beyond experiences to facilitate mutual learning. for example, research assessment is tackled in the the coalition this exchange should include contributing policy groups “careers of researchers & hr”, to the development of guidance and “information and open access”, “research”, and purpose: this commitment will common approaches in order to minimise “doctoral studies”. within una europa, a pilot mooc ensure organisations exchange and contradictions or incompatibilities was developed on team science. these platforms, make use of information for mutual between the assessment practices used by complementary to coara, enable sharing experiences, learning. it will help avoid different organisations. it should also learning from other institutions, and experimenting fragmentation, contribute to the include sharing of lessons learned to with new formats. we will evaluate how we can coherence of assessment practices ensure continuous mutual improvements. contribute to these networks in terms of responsible between organisations, and enable research assessment. researcher mobility. it also will allow 11 those further ahead to share ku leuven is directly involved in coara through the approaches and lessons learned, to wg erip, and indirectly – via the flemish benefit those who have further interuniversity council (vlir)- to the wg aca. we to go on their reform journey. monitor the activities of existing wg (and new ones) to determine where we can officially contribute to in the future. 9 communicate progress made demonstrating progress made towards ku leuven will publish its coara action plan on the 2024 on adherence to the implementing the commitments and institutional web pages once approved, and on zenodo. principles and adherence to the principles is an implementation of the important part of this initiative. annually a follow-up on progress via the action plan annual commitments organisations should commit to regularly and a subsequent update of the plan is foreseen. monitoring update each other and their communities purpose: this commitment will on their adherence and progress. this ensure organisations update one process involves being open to scrutiny another on the progress made. it will from their own communities, sharing foster careful self- reflection and successes as well as challenges, and monitoring of their own adherence communicating their experiences to to the principles and progress facilitate collective progress. towards meeting the commitments. 10 evaluate practices, criteria and growing evidence shows that current ku leuven’s research office seeks advice from tools based on solid evidence assessment processes that rely on ecoom (the bibliometrics group at ku leuven) to and the state- of-the-art in publication- and journal-based metrics are check the validity of bibliometrics used in research on research, and prone to multiple biases. as approaches using assessments. make data openly available for more qualitative research assessment are evidence gathering and piloted by several organisations (e.g. the research office intends to work more closely 2024- research narrative and evidence-based cvs, new together with researchers in the field of science-on- assessment frameworks and indicators), it is science. the exact nature of this collaboration is still purpose: this commitment will important to evaluate and monitor their under discussion. ensure that assessment approach impact based on evidence and rigorous decisions are evidence informed. it methods. activities by other organizations, such as the continuous will help organisations reflect on organisations should contribute to the research-on-research institute projects, are being monitoring their own processes, gain evidence base on research assessment in monitored, and relevant literature is kept track of understanding about whether order to make this possible. for example, mainly through subscription to mailing lists or assessment practices achieve the it could be achieved by making data that journals. desired goals, and engage in can be used for research on research evolutive assessment based on new available, by participating in research on 12 evidence as it becomes available. it research, or by funding research on will also help to ensure control and research. data sharing should be the ownership of research assessment minimum commitment and data should be data by the research shared through open infrastructure, while community. respecting personal data protection.
