gc nr.: 041-1/2025 coara action plan 2025-2029 roadmap for implementing the agreement for reforming research assessment at university of ljubljana date: december 2024 introduction university of ljubljana (univerza v ljubljani, ul) signed the coara agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) committing itself to continuously develop, reform and improve its research assessment ecosystem according to the principles of this agreement and to foster diversity, impact and quality of research and research careers respecting the highest standards of research ethics and integrity. with this coara action plan ul is defining the main goals, challenges and commitments that will be implemented in the period of 2025 to 2029 to meet the agreement's core principles. research at university of ljubljana university of ljubljana is the oldest, largest, and internationally best-ranked university in slovenia. the university was founded in 1919 and encompasses 23 faculties, 3 art academies, and 4 associated members. it covers all scientific fields – natural sciences, engineering, social studies, humanities and arts. the university of ljubljana is renowned for its quality social and natural sciences and technical study programmes as well as art programmes in terms of the number of employees, ul ranks as medium-sized hei and employs more than 6.800 employees, including around 4.600 academic staff. ul is very active in national and international r&d programmes and creates almost half of the research results of slovenia cooperating yearly in about 210 national research programmes, 370 national and 650 european and international research projects. ul provides infrastructural support to research via the infrastructure program of university of ljubljana »network of research and infrastructural centres ul (mric ul)« that includes 31 infrastructural centres within 14 member faculties of ul. the infrastructure program plays an important role in supporting ul participation in international infrastructure projects of the european strategy forum on research infrastructures (esfri). all research infrastructure is open also to researchers outside ul on equal terms. from 2008 ul is committed to respecting the principles of the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for recruitment of researchers, which led to the award of the “hr excellence in research” in 2013. since then ul implemented human resources strategy for teachers and researchers and its actions plans through which it reinforced its efforts to improve the transparent recruitment in accordance with the principles of otm-r, strived for equal working conditions for teachers and researchers and inclusive, open and diversified career system, as well as introduced different measures for increasing the quality and integrity of research. to protect the university intellectual property developed through the public financed research projects and to improve the technology and knowledge transfer from the university to the industry and society, a central university technology transfer office was established in 2007. university incubator and institute for innovation and development and the slovenian innovation hub are three other units in which ul supports innovation, development and strives to increase the economic and social impact of research and innovation in different ways. the ul cooperates with organizations from economy and service in public and private sector, with state organizations, local communities, and civil society. with this cooperation ul accelerates the use of own research and educational achievements and contributes to the social development. with active responses to events in the environment represents the critical conscience of the society. ul has an active membership in different european and international networks and alliances and its development and communication actions regarding the coara principles and action plan will be shared and conducted within those networks’ platforms and professional groups as well as within the coalition. prioritized areas of reforming research assessment criteria based on the guiding principles of: - research quality and impact - ethics and integrity - diversity, inclusiveness and collaboration - freedom of scientific research - respect of the autonomy of organisation - open data and infrastructure the ul roadmap 2025-2029 focuses on five ambitions: research assessment based on qualitative evaluation and peer review up to 2022 the research at ul was funded only from national and international competitive calls. since 2022 when the new scientific research and innovation activity act (zzrid) was introduced in slovenia, ul is receiving the stable research funding for research programs, doctoral researchers and for the development of new research initiatives. since 2023 on ul started to develop its own internal pilot methodology for assessing research programs and researchers for the purpose of allocating the funding internally and this methodology already respected the coara principle to evaluate research programmes on qualitative peer-review with the responsible use of quantitative indicators. the pilot methodology will be further updated yearly based on the previous experiences. acknowledge more varied research outputs in research careers by allowing and recognizing a broader spectrum of research outputs and activities for dissemination, communication and engagement in recruitment of researchers and career progression. one area we still need to implement the changes are habilitation criteria. although in principle, assessment during habilitation procedure should be also qualitative in addition to quantitative criteria, the assessors often rely too much on quantitative indicators. therefore, we are preparing a reform of habilitation procedure by uncoupling quantitative and qualitative assessments with major impact of qualitative assessment. we already have a draft plan for this reform, which will start to implement in 2025 and should be fully implemented in 2026. ul will incorporate the new criteria and methodologies in its hrs4r process for the development of improved and more transparent recruitment process based on otm-r principles. stimulating open science practices of ul researchers. open science is included in the legal framework of the university of ljubljana as follows: the statutes of ul; strategy of ul 2022-2027; digital strategy of ul 2024-2027; rules on stable funding of ul scientific research activities; rules on doctoral studies at ul. infrastructure for open science at ul consists of: repository of ul; social science data archives; clarin.si. 56 scientific journals are published at ul as open access journals, as well as the majority of scientific monographs. apc vouchers in 12 read-and-publish agreements with scientific publishers can be used by ul- affiliated researchers. to support management of research data for fair and as open as possible, ul has employed five data stewards with phd degrees and established a network for rdm support, consisting also of contact persons at faculties where stewards are not employed. as part project activities, ul will carry out other activities as well to align its processes with the principles of open science. a lot of attention is given to train researchers and phd students on different aspects of open science. awareness raising of research assessment reform ul is very decentralized university, and all the processes are all the time communicated with the academic community at ul member faculties and with the ul formal bodies. the implementation of the reform process of research assessment will require a highest involvement of the academic community at all levels from the start. ul will involve leads and researchers from different disciplines and stages in the development of reform through different steps of the process. skills development for early career researchers ul will pay a special attention to educate and train the new generation of early career researchers with the coara principles and new models of research assessment. the ul roadmap for implementing the agreement for reforming research assessment will follow the steps of 1) reviewing the internal assessment processes and methodologies; 2) defining the gaps and practices that are not in-line with coara principles; 3) developing new tools, methodologies and criteria; 4) accepting and confirming reformed methodologies at the internal formal bodies (committees, senate); 5) implementing new tools and methodologies. core commitments and their implementation ul action plan starts from the beginning of 2025 and lasts until the end of 2029. the table below reflects ul roadmap and time plan according to the coara action plan guidelines. phase reflection / commitment roadmap with aims and goals time plan reflect on your strategy and change ul approach to assessment reform approach follows the guiding principles of: research quality and impact, ethics and integrity, diversity, inclusiveness and 2025-2026 collaboration, freedom of scientific research, respect of the autonomy of organisation, open data and infrastructure. to overlook and lead the process of reviewing its internal assessment processes and implementing coara principles and tools the assessment policy committee will be established in cooperation with different departments (rector's office, hr, research, quality and strategic management, open science, communications). involve your institutional community in coara principles and action plan will be starting phase the change process communicated with senat's committees, deans and heads of departments, researchers at different levels and support staff at their meetings. all internal stakeholders are involved in the 2025-2026 process through the meetings and focus groups. ul will also actively participate with the slovene branch of coara activities. identify key challenges to address ul research assessment needs to be aligned with the assessment of the national research agency and their quantitative and qualitative criteria for allocating the funding so ul will 2025-2028 cooperate closely with the national funding agency. some resistance from researchers who are used on quantitative assessment. 1. recognise the diversity of ul will change the habilitation contributions to, and careers in, procedures and criteria for progression research in accordance with the needs with an emphasis on qualitative 2025-2027 and nature of the research evaluation and acknowledging more varied research outputs hr recruitment procedures and criteria for the recruitment will be updated and operational remodelled according to coara action plan for principles based more on qualitative years 2025- 2029 criteria and varies research outputs and experiences 2. base research assessment primarily the ul already implemented on qualitative evaluation for which peer methodology for assessing research and review is central, supported by researchers for the purpose of allocating responsible use of quantitative the funding internally is predominantly 2025-2029 indicators based on peer review and will be further updated every year. improved and responsible metrics will be introduced into the assessment system with lesser impact on final score than qualitative assessment. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in in internal research assessment the jif n/a coara core research assessment of journal and and h-index are not of essential commitments publication based metrics, in particular importance, but national research listed 1-10 inappropriate uses of journal impact assessment system and national factor (jif) and h-index research agency still uses some of the quantitative criterial for assessing the research applications. 4. avoid the use of rankings of research we do not apply rankings of research organisations in research assessment organisations in research assessment. n/a 5. commit resources to reforming a large number of human resources will research assessment as is needed to be activated in the reform process. achieve the organisational changes besides the assessment policy committed to committee the deans, senate's committees (committee for research and development, habilitation committee) and support offices 2025-2029 (research, hr, legal, quality and strategic management, pr, knowledge transfer, artistic activity) will participate in activities for organisation changes. 6. 6.1 criteria for units and institutions with the direct involvement of research ul will closely cooperate with the 2025-2028 organisations and researchers at all national research agency in reforming the career stages, review and develop assessment of research performing criteria for assessing research units and organisations research performing organisations, while promoting interoperability ul will review its internal assessment 6.2 criteria for projects and processes, criteria and tools and update researchers with the direct existing and develop new assessment involvement of researchers at all career approaches with accordance with 2025-2028 stages, review and develop criteria, coara principles together with the tools and processes for the assessment researchers from different disciplines and of research projects, research teams at different career stages and researchers that are adapted to their context of application a special part of ul webpage will be 7. raise awareness of research dedicated to the coara action plan and coara core assessment reform and provide assessment reform. the coara commitments transparent communication, guidance, communication toolkit will be shared listed 1-10 and training on assessment criteria and with our communication department. to processes as well as their use inform the academic and non-academic community about the research 2025-2029 assessment reform we will also use internal newsletter "e-univerzitetnik" and the social media facebook and linkedin there will be guidance available to assessment panels and members of the committees and involved researchers 8. exchange practices and experiences ul will cooperate, exchange practices to enable mutual learning within and and experiences, and foster debate in beyond the coalition national assessment consortia and in european alliances (ex. eutopia) or 2025-2029 associations (ex. the guild) as well as with the coalition 9. communicate progress made on we will inform the internal academic and adherence to the principles and non-academic community about the implementation of the commitments progress through the internal communication channels (newsletter, 2025-2029 intranet) and external national and international community through the webpage. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and the evaluation of the new criteria, 2028 - 2029 tools based on solid evidence and the practices and tools will be done using the state-of the-art in research on research, scope framework for research and make data openly available for evaluation evidence gathering and research
