information society development institute coara action plan idsi joining coara the information society development institute (idsi) of the republic of moldova is a scientific institution specialized in providing scientific support and instrumentation for the development of the information society. throughout its existence, idsi has endeavored to promote integrity and excellence in the academic community of the republic of moldova. in 2014, the institution adhered to the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers, in 2017 it obtained the human resources excellence in research (hrs4r) logo, as well as approved the open access policy and the code of ethics and professional deontology, and later joined other relevant international initiatives for the promotion and realization of quality scientific research (e.g. in 2023 it became a member of openaire). idsi has promoted the leiden manifesto for measuring research and the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) in the scientific community in the republic of moldova. e.g., idsi has promoted the leiden manifesto for measuring research and the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) in the moldovan scientific community.) in the light of the principles promoted, idsi welcomed the development at eu level of the agreement on reforming research assessment. with the emergence of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) and its openness to all interested parties, idsi has analyzed in detail the commitments and principles contained in the agreement and decided that they correspond to the aspirations of the institution. accordingly, the institution signed the agreement online on the coara website, and on october 26, 2023 idsi was notified that its application for coara membership had been accepted and validated by the coalition's board of directors. idsi informed the community about its membership and the importance of implementing the 10 commitments in the republic of moldova through various actions, including an article on the institution's website. the role of idsi in the moldovan research ecosystem and its evaluation idsi is the institution in the republic of moldova that has the most valuable and most extensive information resources on national r&d: national bibliometric instrument - publications, expert online – researchers, raportare.stiu.md - results of research projects, conferințe.stiu.md - scientific events, idsi tv - online streaming of scientific events, cdi indicators - indicators of the r&d system, etc. the institute is the most important national scientific center in the field of science evaluation (science about science), developing papers such as "scientific research strategy: evidence from the republic of moldova", "methodological framework for the evaluation of r&d projects and programs in the republic of moldova", "r&d indicators 2020" or "types of results of scientific activities". in this way, the institution provides a transparent and accountable framework for research evaluation in the republic of moldova. with information resources at their disposal, expert evaluators can focus on assessing the actual quality of the scientific output, receiving the necessary support for evidence-based decision-making. for these reasons, idsi aims through this plan, in addition to the institutional implementation of the commitments, to promote at national level the responsible evaluation of research in line with the guiding principles established by coara. this is also determined by the fact that institutional autonomy is limited in the republic of moldova and research evaluation is largely regulated at national level. activities to realize coara commitments by idsi proposed activities include: no title of action coara period of note commitment realization 1 adjusting the rules and 1, 6 2024-2028 evaluation criteria and procedures for internal evaluation procedures related to recruitment, career of scientific staff and outputs in advancement and rewards idsi to coara principles are to be revised (once the national regulatory framework is completed / stabilized). 2 encouraging idsi researchers to 2 2024-2028 encouragement will be become evaluators of different given by considering assessment activities at expert bodies promotion and reward. 3 advising on draft legislation in the 1, 2, 3, 6 2024-2028 the commitments field of research prepared by indicated to coara refer to the issues that we will central public authorities focus on in our expert assessment of the draft normative acts and in the proposals put forward. 4 advise on the draft methodology 1, 2, 4, 5 2024 according to the plan of for evaluation of research and the ministry of education and research, this innovation organizations methodology is to be approved in 2024. coara's indicated commitments refer to the aspects that we will focus on in our expert assessment of the draft normative act and in the proposals put forward (in particular with emphasis on the need to take into account different contributions, depending on the field of science and the mission of the organization; on the need for organizations to be evaluated not only on the results of their research, but also on their broader contribution to the research ecosystem and their contribution to knowledge generation and scientific, technological, economic, cultural and societal impact). 5 drafting proposals for the revision 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 2024-2028 coara's indicated of normative acts in line with the commitments refer to the issues we will focus on in coara principles and submitting our review of legislation them to the ministry of education and proposals. and research (mec), the national agency for research and development (nard) and other decision-makers (proposals for the modification of evaluation criteria and instruments). 6 promote the "types of r&d 1, 2, 6 2024-2026 with the approval of this outputs" classification developed document we aim to replace the focus on by idsi for national endorsement publications in the reporting of research projects with an assessment of the scientific results themselves. the types of outputs include a variety of possible contributions. 7 organization of 2, 7, 8 2024-2028 seminars/webinars to debate different aspects of research evaluation reform, including the provisions of coara, the san francisco declaration on research evaluation (dora), the principles proposed by the leiden manifesto for research metrics, the hong kong principles for the evaluation of researchers and other initiatives. 8 promoting coara principles 7 2024-2028 this process takes place in among phd students the context of the submission of the public defense of all phd theses by idsi. 9 studying different aspects of 7, 10 2024-2028 this is in line with one of research evaluation, writing idsi's scientific priorities - sciences of science. scientific articles, presenting them at conferences and publishing them in research journals. 10 preparing materials on 7 2024-2028 responsible science assessment (science popularization articles, short information briefs) and placing them on the idsi page and social media. 11 combating predatory 2, 6, 7,10 2024-2027 publishing in pseudo- pseudoscientific publishing: scientific editions is a worrying process that has - organizing webinars; gained momentum in the - submission of a project proposal republic of moldova on this topic; (including as a result of the - establishment of a list of inappropriate use of bibliometric indicators and pseudoscientific publications in the acceptance of the which moldovan researchers "publish or perish" publish; principle). - drafting proposals to combat the phenomenon and submitting them to decision-makers, etc. 12 ensuring transparency of r&d 10 2024-2028 maintaining and results (clear and transparent developing it tools supports responsible data collection) by maintaining evaluation in line with the and developing the it tools coara principles, but also managed by idsi. allows access to the data and analysis used by those being evaluated. 13 campaigns to raise awareness 7 2024-2028 the activity is necessary to and promote professional ethics ensure that only scientific results that meet ethical and deontology in research, and quality standards are including webinars, studies and taken into account in the postings on misconduct in evaluation of research. scientific research, etc. 14 developing collaboration with the 8 2024-2028 through these activities we national agency for quality aim to familiarize with and adhere to the coara assurance in education and commitments (advocacy research (anacec), ancd and campaigns) of the mec to promote responsible moldovan bodies evaluation of research, by responsible for the evaluation of research at submitting proposals for national level. regulatory changes, inviting to webinars organized by idsi and other actions. 15 monitoring and reporting on 9, 10 2024-2028 the activity will be carried idsi's activities to implement out internally and externally, including coara commitments. participation in meetings organized under the coara umbrella.
