academy institutes coara action plan 2024-2028 1 table of contents 1 context: existing frameworks and initiatives 3 2 recognition & rewards at the academy 4 3 commitments and actions 5 2 1 context: existing frameworks and initiatives in november 2019, the dutch universities as represented by the association of universities in the netherlands (vsnu, now universities of the netherlands (unl)), along with the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences (the academy), the dutch research council (nwo), the netherlands organisation for health research and development (zonmw) and the netherlands federation of university medical centres (nfu) published the position paper ‘room for everyone’s talent’ – thereby launching the national recognition & rewards program (r&r). all the institutions involved, including the academy, committed to the following guiding principles: • diversification and vitalisation of career paths, thereby promoting excellence in each of the key areas of academia. • acknowledgement of both the independence and individual talents and aspirations of academics and team performance. • an emphasis on quality of work over output metrics (such as number of publications). • encouragement of all aspects of open science. • encouragement of high-quality academic leadership. each of the organisations involved has set up committees to work towards a broader system of recognition and rewards in academia and for academic staff. they coordinate their efforts regularly at the national level to ensure a common pathway. in april 2023, the road map room for everyone’s talent in practice was published. in the road map, the stakeholders use the five priorities from the position paper to indicate what they want to achieve in the coming years. the guiding principles of the position paper ‘room for everyone’s talent’ were also incorporated in the national protocol that is used to evaluate the quality of research conducted at dutch universities and the academy and nwo institutes. committees of dutch and international experts and peers evaluate research units and institutes through review visits. the evaluation criteria and procedures are described in the strategy evaluation protocol (sep). the revised sep (sep 2021-2027) that was published in 2020, facilitates a broader system of recognition and rewards by basing the evaluation on the research units' own goals and strategy and focusing less on numerical data. research units determine for themselves which indicators they consider relevant for evaluation of the unit's research. evaluation committees will no longer assign scores in their report, instead they provide a critical substantive opinion and recommendations for the future. the vision that a reform of assessment of research, researchers and research organisations is needed, is not limited to the netherlands. in september 2022 the european ‘agreement on reforming research assessment’ officially opened for signature. the agreement was co-created with over 350+ organisations from 40 countries and by now signed by 600+ organisations. the european ‘agreement on reforming research assessment’ endorses the objectives of the national recognition & rewards programme. in october 2022, unl, each of the fourteen individual universities in the netherlands, the academy, nwo, and nfu signed the agreement and became a member of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). by signing the european ‘agreement on reforming research assessment’ the academy committed to prepare an action plan that translates the commitments in the agreement into activities that contribute to a reform of the assessment of research and researchers at the academy institutes. 3 2 recognition & rewards at the academy the academy is both a learned society and an organisation of national research institutes. the academy’s duties – in brief – are: to serve as a learned society representing the full spectrum of scientific and scholarly disciplines; to act as a management body for national research institutes; to advise the dutch government on matters related to scientific pursuit. the academy translated the guiding principles in the position paper ‘room for everyone’s talent’ into the recognition & rewards agenda 2022-2025 for the academy institutes, that was published in january 2022. in its effort to fulfil the commitments outlined in the european ‘agreement on reforming research assessment’, the academy has developed this action plan. given the overlap with the objectives of the national recognition & rewards programme, many of the activities listed below are also included in the academy’s recognition & rewards agenda 2022-2025. the academy’s recognition & rewards agenda and the coara action plan both focus on the academy institutes. it considers objectives and actions to reform the assessment of research units the assessment of staff members. 4 3 commitments and actions commitment in the agreement state of play at the academy in july 2024 objectives and actions 2024-2028 on reforming research assessment 1 recognise the diversity of diversity of careers: diversity of careers: contributions to, and careers in, a) some institutes have drafted staffing plans using the strategy a) use experience that some institutes gained on drafting research in accordance with the and objectives of the institute as a guiding principle. staffing plans for development of staffing plans at all needs and nature of the research. b) some institutes have described several distinct career paths (larger) institutes. based on the recognition and rewards programme and in line b) further investigate the development of differentiated with the recently updated ufo job profiles career paths at all institutes for academic and research c) in q4 2023 the academy’s vision appreciative leadership was support staff. published. c) implementation of the appreciative leadership vision. diversity of contributions: d) institutes have started developing new indicators to monitor diversity of contributions: research performance in preparation for their next research d) open science: the knaw roadmap open science will be evaluation using the strategy evaluation protocol (sep) 2021- updated (starting in q3 2024) and the digital 2027. competence center will continue to develop. e) stimulating open science: development of knaw roadmap e) the academy will apply for funding at nwo to improve open science in 2021, launch of knaw digital competence on the rewarding and recognition of open science center in 2021 to strengthen the support for researchers for activities of staff members. fair-data, participation in the national regieorgaan open see also actions listed under commitment 2. science. 2 base research assessment a) institutes with tenure and career tracks have adjusted a) design of a new interview format for all the various types primarily on qualitative evaluation assessment criteria to align them with the recognition and of interviews (including the annual consultation). for which peer review is central, rewards programme b) in 2024 sep 2021-2027 will be used for the first time at the b) an analysis will be performed in q3 2024 on the supported by responsible use of qualitative and quantitative indicators that were used by academy: six academy institutes will be assessed by an quantitative indicators the six institutes in the self-evaluation reports that were evaluation committee using this protocol. c) via participation in the national working group strategy prepared for the six sep-evaluations in 2024. the evaluation protocol (sep), the academy contributed to the academy’s r&r steering committee and the institute 5 development of sep 2021-2027 and will continue to director’s council will discuss to what extent these contribute to a successful implementation of the sep 2021- indicators meet the r&r guiding principles and which 2027 including the alignment with recognition and rewards further steps need to be developed for responsible use of programme. metrics in future research assessment and in monitoring progress as part of the regular quality assurance cycle. c) the academy will continue to participate in the national working group strategy evaluation protocol (sep) and will play an active role in evaluating sep 2021-2027 and drafting sep 2027-2033 including the alignment with r&r. 3 abandon inappropriate uses in a) the academy disabled the option to display the h-index on a) the academy will emphasize that alignment with r&r research assessment of journal- the public portal of its research information system (pure). should continue to be a point of attention when drafting and publication-based metrics, in appropriate alternatives to the jif (such as the source the sep 2027-2033. normalized impact per paper (snip) or field weighted particular inappropriate uses of citation impact (fwci) are available, and institutes are journal impact factor (jif) and h- encouraged to use these. index b) in april 2019, the academy signed the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora), a global initiative that aims to reduce dependence on bibliometric indicators in the evaluation of research and researchers and increase the use of other criteria. c) the research of the academy institutes is evaluated every six years according to the national strategy evaluation protocol (sep). the most recent version of this protocol (sep 2021- 2027) states that the use of the journal impact factor is not allowed. the use of individual bibliometric indicators such as the h-index is strongly discouraged. 4 avoid the use of rankings of the academy institutes do not participate in rankings. rankings n/a research organisations in research are not used in assessments of staff or institutes. assessment. 5 commit resources to reforming the academy set up a r&r project organisation for 2022-2025 project organisation after 2025: to be decided, depending on research assessment as is needed consisting of 1,2 fte: evaluation of the programme. to achieve the organisational • 0.4 fte hr project manager (includes 0.1 fte for liaising with changes committed to national programme team) 6 • 0.4 fte hr policy adviser / centre for career and development (in kind) • 0.1 fte policy adviser for forum, advisory and research department (in kind) • 0.1 fte communication adviser (in kind) • 0.1 fte secretarial/administrative project assistance • 0.1 fte project committee chair: national representative and r&r advocate at academy institute many staff members are involved in short- and long-term projects related to r&r. 6 review and develop research a) research assessment criteria for the institutes are regularly a) we will start a project on publication culture: who is listed assessment criteria, tools and discussed with the directors of the academy institutes. in as an author on publications, how do you recognize processes november 2021 prof. dr. de rijcke (leiden university) was everyone’s contribution if not through credit, are their invited to share her knowledge on translating strategy to different practices depending on the discipline? relevant indicators, advantages and disadvantages of specific b) based on the analysis listed under commitment 2 action 2, indicators and improving the process of continuous internal use of new tools will be considered as well as the possible monitoring. development of guidelines for metrics and indicators. b) in spring 2023 an analysis was performed and discussed in the director’s council of the progress made in translating the institutes’ strategies to relevant indicators and in developing more qualitative indicators. 7 raise awareness of research a) staff is updated on recent developments related to r&r via a) we will continue to share and update information on r&r assessment reform and provide newsletters, the external and internal websites. the interview and related topics on our new intranet (portus). transparent communication, series humans of the academy was launched in 2024 and b) in 2024 an integral culture campaign plan was drafted to draws attention to activities related to (among other things) improve communication on themes such as leadership, guidance, and training on r&r. social safety, diversity & inclusion and r&r. this will be assessment criteria and processes b) the national working group strategy evaluation protocol further developed and implemented from 2025 onwards. as well as their use (sep) organizes trainings and meetings on a regular basis for c) the national working group strategy evaluation protocol academy and other staff involved in research assessments. (sep) and the national online platform rrview will c) the national online platform rrview plays an important role continue to contribute to training and sharing best in exchanging best practices on r&r. the academy’s r&r practices on r&r and related matters. project manager is an active contributor. 8 exchange practices and a) the academy participates in the national program a) the national program recognition & rewards and rrview recognition & rewards. it has a steering committee, a online platfom will continue to play an important role. 7 experiences to enable mutual committee of chairpersons and committee of project b) a national working group on coara is being formed in learning within and beyond the managers from the various participating institutions. the which the academy participates. an application for coalition academy participates at each of the three levels. establishing a national chapter will be considered. b) the national r&r programme office together with the project managers and chairpersons organise activities, collect material, arrange meetings and act as a catalyst for this national movement, which is attracting interest from abroad. 9 communicate progress made on a) communication on coara will be included in the adherence to the principles and academy’s r&r communication strategy, see commitment implementation of the 7. b) this action plan will be shared on zenodo commitments 10 evaluate practices, criteria and a) see the national road map room for everyone’s talent in a) in 2024 the strategy evaluation protocol 2021-2027 will tools based on solid evidence and practice. be evaluated. the results will be used when drafting sep the state-of-the-art in research on b) in june 2024, the results of the culture barometer 2027-2033 including improved alignment with r&r. recognition & rewards were released: a survey conducted b) progress on r&r will be monitored both at a national and research, and make data openly among scientists in the netherlands in early 2024. institute level when implementing the roadmap and by available for evidence gathering repeating the culture barometer survey again (in year and research 2026) 8
