approved by order no v-251 of the chairman of the research council of lithuania of 12 june 2024 action plan for the application of the coara principles in the activities of the research council of lithuania (2024-2028) no task brief description of the task 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 i. rcl's readiness to implement the coara principles 1.1. assess the coherence of 1) continuously review and update the x x x x x the rcl's strategic strategic activity directions, priorities and activity directions and the plan to align it with the coara priorities, the strategic principles. plan and the coara 2) identify strategic challenges related to the principles. application of the coara principles. 3) identify solutions for challenges and include them in the coara action plan. 1.2. provide resources 1) provide resources for the implementation of x x x x x necessary for the the coara action plan, including training implementation of the for the rcl experts and applicants. coara actions. 1.3. develop the research 1) communicate with the rcl, experts, x x x x x culture and research lithuanian research communities, other activity assessment coara institutions and the public on the practices based on the application of the coara principles and principles of qualitative changes in the research culture. assessment. 2) improve competences of the rcl applicants and experts in preparing and assessing proposals in line with the coara principles. 1.4. monitor the 1) monitor the implementation of the coara x x x x x implementation of the action plan according to the parts provided coara plan. for therein. ii. improving the assessment of r&d performance of research and higher education institutions and their departments 1 2.1. improve the expert 1) analyse good practices in expert assessment x x x x assessment methodology of r&d activities in selected foreign in line with the coara countries. principles. 2) develop and implement criteria for the proper evaluation of interdisciplinary research papers. 3) review the content and format of the institution's self-assessment. 4) reflect on the implementation of the principle of transparency in the provision of institutional data for evaluation: publication of the institutions’ self-analysis reports (except sensitive data). 2.2. improve the formal 1) consider all components of formal x x x x x x x x evaluation methodology evaluation: in line with the coara • research papers; principles. • international projects; • contracts with economic operators. 2) identify those formal evaluation components that could be modified to move towards qualitative evaluation, taking into account the incentive funding based on this evaluation; 3) consult research and higher education institutions and associations; 4) specify the timeframes of possible amendments, what legal acts and how should be amended. 2.3 consider the data 1) identify what data and how could be x x x x x x necessary for the expert collected and processed taking into account assessment and formal the features and capacities of existing evaluation methodologies databases; updated on the basis of 2) update the documents governing the the coara principles. collection of relevant data from research and initiate collection and higher education institutions. processing of new data. 2 2.4. formulate proposals for 1) assess how the coara principles affect the x x x x x possible changes to the assessment of doctoral studies by the rcl. r&d assessment system 2) consider other possible linkages. in relation to other assessments carried out in lithuania. 2.5. formulate proposals on 1) consider and initiate, as appropriate, x x x x x the need to update the amendments to the law on research and relevant legal acts and higher education related to the application initiate their updating. of the coara principles; 2) consider and initiate, as appropriate, amendments to legal acts of the mess (assessment descriptions, funding procedures) and related changes; 3) consider and initiate, as appropriate, related amendments to legal acts, procedures, regulations of the rcl. iii. improving the evaluation of research projects 3.1. systematically improve 1) review the proposal forms for the rcl x x the evaluation of research measures, identify possible non-compliances projects in line with the with the coara principles and provide coara principles. guidance for their improvement. 2) review the criteria for evaluation the rcl measures, identify the criteria that may not be in line with the coara principles and provide guidance for their improvement. 3.2. review the proposal, 1) assess the experience of the proposal and its x x x x x scientific report and their evaluation forms used in the rgp call xiii: evaluation forms of the upon approval of the call results conduct researcher groups projects surveys of the principal investigators of (rgps) projects selected for funding and peer review panels, as well as of the rcl’s administrative staff, observers appointed by committees, and the staff of project management units of implementing institutions, summarise results, and propose possible improvements to the forms. 3 3.3. consider the effectiveness 1) once a year, evaluate different types of x x x x of application of the practices of the rcl measures in relation to coara principles. the evaluation of proposals and their reports: determine the evaluation method (ex-post evaluation, survey, desk review, etc.), summarise the evaluation results, suggest aspects to be modified (in terms of documentary forms, internal regulations, etc.). consider other possibilities, methods and frequency of feedback between applicants, experts, institutions and the rcl. 2) in the context of ex-post evaluations of x x x x x measures, also consider compliance with the coara principles or practices and expertise of their application. 3.4. formulate proposals for 1) evaluate both internal legal acts of the rcl x x x amendments to the and external regulations approved by other lithuanian legal acts entities for adherence to the coara pertaining to the principles (e.g., the doctoral (phd) assessment of research programme regulations, the description of projects. the procedure for the implementation of the competition-based doctoral (phd) programme, the description of the procedure for the provision of support to doctoral (phd) students), 2) suggest possible amendments, initiate discussion with the legislators of the above mentioned legal acts. iv. improving the assessment of researcher competences 4.1. accumulate good 1) conduct a survey of research and higher x x x practices of institutions in education institutions. assessing researcher 2) analyse the responses received and make competences and share recommendations. them with the research community. 4.2. initiate amendments to 1) summarise the survey results, draw on the x x the lher on mandatory european experience, identify shortcomings 4 competences of in the assessment of researchers, and initiate researchers in line with the necessary amendments to the rl law on the coara principles. higher education and research (lher). 4.3. share experiences in 1) systematise experiences in assessing x x x x assessing the competences researcher competences and develop good of researchers in line with practice guidelines. the coara principles for 2) share good practice guidelines for assessing evaluating r&d researcher competences with those activities. responsible for the assessment of research projects. 3) share good practice guidelines for assessing researcher competences with those responsible for the assessment of doctoral studies. 4) share good practice guidelines for assessing researcher competences with those responsible for assessing activities of research and higher education institutions. 5
