coara ac on plan 2024-2027 oﬃce of the vice-rector for research and knowledge transfer july 2025 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 1. introduction the universidad ceu cardenal herrera is a public-service oriented and privately-managed university that forms part of the fundación san pablo ceu, spain's largest privately-run educa onal ins tu on. our educa onal approach is rooted in the principles of chris an humanism – principles that drive our social commitment. this is reflected in our extensive scholarship programmes and pioneering ini a ves in student volunteering and community service, both na onally and interna onally. our values also the pla orm for our research eﬀorts. our research seeks to improve the society we live in, from both the technical and humanis c perspec ves. the universidad ceu cardenal herrera has been part of the coali on for advancing research assessment (coara) since 26 april 2023, when the university also signed up to the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra). as signatories to the agreement, we are commi ed to drawing up an ac on plan, which, subject to its approval by the governing council, is to be implemented during the period 2024-27. 1 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 commitment scope action time period 1. recognize the broaden the spectrum of - review the 2024-2027 diversity of what is valued in ins tu onal policy contribu ons research, while regarding research to, and careers acknowledging that this assessment. in, research in may vary across - develop a accordance with disciplines and that each responsible research the needs and individual researcher policy that takes into nature of the should not be expected account the diversity research. to contribute to all of research areas, ac vi es at once. the diﬀerent levels of research careers, leadership within research groups, the diversity of the means of dissemina ng research results, as well as the researcher’s contribu on. (use of the credit taxonomy). 2. base research assessment should rely - raise awareness 2024-2027 assessment on on qualita ve judgement about the qualita ve for which peer review is responsible use of evalua on central, supported by metrics. supported by responsibly used - raise awareness quan ta ve quan ta ve indicators about the progress indicators. where appropriate. of reform in research assessment (open science /social impact). 3. abandon abandon the - stop considering the 2024-2027 inappropriate inappropriate use of jif and h-index as uses in research journal- and publica on- necessary or assessment of based metrics in research suﬃcient indicators journal- and assessment. for assessing publica on- inappropriate uses research quality. based metrics, include: - assessors should not in par cular - relying base their decisions inappropriate exclusively on solely on these uses of journal author-based bibliometric impact factor metrics (for indicators. (jif) and the h- example, index. coun ng papers, patents, cita ons, grants, 2 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 etc.) to assess quality and/or impact. - assessing outputs based on metrics related to publica on venue, format or language. - relying on any other metric that does not adequately capture quality and/or impact. 4. avoid the use acknowledge the - recognize the 2024-2027 of rankings of methodological limita ons of the research limita ons of such criteria used in organiza ons in approaches and avoid the compiling rankings. research trickle-down eﬀects on - review their use in assessment. research and research research assessment assessment. (e.g. internal compe ve funding processes). 5. commit provide resources to - prepara on of the 2024-2027 resources to enable the engagement ac on plan. reforming of researchers at all - crea on of a research career stages in reforming commi ee for the assessment as is research assessment. implementa on and needed to monitoring of the achieve the ac on plan. organiza onal - annual budget changes alloca on for the commi ed to implementa on of the ac on plan ac vi es. 6. review and research assessment by - review and update 2024-2027 develop research funders should internal compe ve research consider disciplinary, funding processes assessment mul -, inter-, and trans- (criteria, documents, criteria, tools disciplinary research as etc.). and processes well as contribu ons to - develop a code of knowledge genera on prac ce that and scien fic, incorporates the technological, economic, principles of cultural and societal responsible research. impact. 3 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 7. raise pay par cular a en on to - training ac vi es 2024-2027 awareness of raising awareness among related to coara research researchers at all career principles. assessment stages. - internal reform and communica on provide ac vi es. transparent - training ac vi es communica on, related to research guidance, and assessment (sexenios training on [six-year assessment assessment periods], criteria and accredita ons, aie, processes as etc.). well as their use. - develop how-to guides (compe ve funding processes, etc.) - opportuni es to discuss the coara principles and their implementa on at ceu uch. - review online resources and materials to ensure that content is relevant and easy to find. 8. exchange contribute to the - par cipate in open 2024-2027 prac ces and development of guidance forums: coara, experiences that and common approaches na onal chapter, etc. enable mutual in order to minimize - share materials and learning within contradic ons or best prac ces with and beyond incompa bili es between the coara coara. the assessment prac ces community. used by diﬀerent organiza ons. 9. communicate monitoring and upda ng - publica on of the 2024-2027 progress made on progress in fulfilling ac on plan (zenodo). on adherence to the commitments made. - internal the principles communica on and regarding the gradual implementa on implementa on of of the the commitments commitments made. 10. evaluate monitoring of successful - stay informed about 2024-2027 prac ces, cases of more qualita ve progress through criteria and research assessment or par cipa on in tools based on innova ve proposals. events or other solid evidence meaningful ac vi es. and the state of 4 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 the art in research on research, 5 ceu uch ac on plan 2024–2027 2. governance and monitoring of the action plan the ac ons of the uch-coara ac on plan 2024-2027 fall within the ins tu onal remit of the oﬃce of the vice-rector for research and knowledge transfer. the ac on plan has been drawn up by a working group made up of researchers and technical staﬀ from the oﬃce of the vice-rector for research and knowledge transfer. the working group will assess the implementa on and progress of the ac on plan every six months. the ac on plan will be: - submi ed for approval to the research commi ee - submi ed for approval to the governing council 6
