approved by order no. v- 291 of 25 april 2025 commander of the general jonas žemaitis military academy of lithuania action plan for the implementation of commitments under the agreement on the reform of scientific research assessment general jonas žemaitis military academy of lithuania general jonas žemaitis military academy of lithuania (hereinafter referred to as mal) is the only higher military education institution in lithuania, continuing the traditions of the military school named after the first president of lithuania, established on january 25, 1919. the mission of mal is to become a unique national university where academic studies and military training are harmoniously integrated, ensuring the comprehensive education and development of responsible officer leaders, conducting high- quality scientific research, and promoting the principles of lifelong learning to ensure a highly qualified officer corps for the lithuanian armed forces. the vision of mal is to become an internationally recognized university and competence center for the training of officer leaders in the fields of national security, defence, and military studies, offering relevant and competitive academic programs, conducting high-level research, and fostering an effective network of cooperation with social and academic partners. mal academic staff is divided into five research groups: – governance of security institutions – defence economics and management – management of logistics and defence technologies – world politics – security policy the priority research areas at mal are political science and management, which form the basis of the scientific research conducted. mal seeks to enable researchers to carry out advanced, internationally recognized research aligned with its fields of study, thus ensuring the integration and synergy of academic studies and research. in september 2024, mal joined the coara (coalition for advancing research assessment) coalition, expressing its commitment to implementing the reform of research assessment. in line with the principles set out in the coalition agreement of august 9, 2024, mal committed to developing an action plan under which the institution’s documents related to research assessment will be reviewed and updated in accordance with the core principles of coara. in order to implement the amendments to the law on science and studies of the republic of lithuania and other related legal acts, which define the mandatory and recommended competencies and the scope of abilities corresponding to each career stage of lecturers and research and artistic staff, the regulations on the recruitment, performance evaluation and certification of lecturers and research and artistic staff at the general jonas žemaitis military academy of lithuania were prepared in 2024 and updated by order no. v-47 of the commander of the general jonas žemaitis military academy of lithuania on 27 january 2025. the table below presents the mal action plan for the implementation of the research assessment reform commitments. the plan is intended to be reviewed and updated annually to reflect the ongoing collaboration between working groups and the academic community, including researchers across all levels and disciplines, as well as heads of research activities. description of the planned mal coara principle1 planned result 2025 2026 2027 2028 principle2 activities 1. recognize the the aim of this 1.1. establish a 1.1. a working x x x diversity of commitment is to help working group group has been contributions to expand the recognition of representing the main established and research and diversity in research scientific fields of the proposals have been research careers, practices, activities, and mal to determine the made on how to considering the needs careers, taking into account evaluation criteria for update the and nature of the specific nature of the competencies of evaluation criteria research. research disciplines and career stages of for the competencies other research activities. researchers (lecturers of career stages of the commitment aims for and research staff) and researchers (lecturers changes in evaluation propose possible and research staff) as practices to enable the changes according to needed. recognition of a wide coara principles, diversity: significant policies, and guidelines. contributions of researchers to science and societal well-being, including various outcomes not limited to journal publications; integrating practices into activities that help ensure the reliability, openness, transparency, and inclusivity of research and the research process, including peer review, teamwork, and collaboration, as well as 1 coara principles https://cora.eu/agreement/the-commitments/ 2 description of the coara principle, translated according to the description of principles provided on the coara website (https://coara.eu/agreement/the- commitments/) activities involving 1.2. prepare guidelines 1.2. guidelines for x x x teaching, leadership, for research supporting research supporting supervision, training, and studies for the 2026– studies for the 2026– mentoring. 2029 plans, considering 2029 plans have the recognition of been prepared, diversity in research considering practices, activities, recognition of the and careers. diversity in research practices, activities, and careers of scientists (lecturers and researchers). 2. base the evaluation the aim of this 2.1. establish and 2.1. established x x of scientific research commitment is to facilitate implement qualitative qualitative research primarily on the transition to research research evaluation evaluation qualitative evaluation criteria that principles that prioritize principles are based assessment, with peer focus on quality, while peer review and on peer review and review as the main recognizing that responsible use of responsible use of criterion and responsible use of quantitative indicators, quantitative responsible use of quantitative indicators can adhering to the indicators, adhering quantitative aid in evaluation if principles of expert to the principles of indicators. meaningful and assessment, transparency, ethics, appropriate, which depends transparency, and ethics. and gender equality. on the context. 2.2. organize 2.2. the newly x x the commitment aims to workshops for acquired knowledge ensure that peer review evaluators to ensure of evaluators will processes are developed to they apply a responsible enable the meet the core principles of approach to quantitative application of rigor and transparency: indicators and adhere to qualitative criteria expert assessment, strict peer review and responsible use transparency, impartiality, standards. of quantitative appropriateness, indicators in the confidentiality, integrity, evaluation process, and ethical aspects, gender, ensuring the rigor, equality, and diversity. transparency, and impartiality of the research evaluation process. 2.3. centre for research 2.3. crpa provided x x x x projects and analysis recommendations to (hereinafter referred to the mal academic as crpa) provide community on the recommendations to responsible use of the mal academic scientometric community on the indicators. responsible use of scientometric indicators in evaluating scientific research. 2.4. review and update 2.4. review and x x x mal legal acts related update as needed the to the evaluation of legal acts regulating academic activities as the evaluation of needed. activities at mal. 3. when assessing the goal of this 3.1. the evaluation of 3.1. the annual tasks - - - - - - - academic commitment is to ensure mal academic of mal researchers achievements, that indicators used in achievements is based reflect their research scientific research international rankings, on scientific interest quality, impact, and organization which are unsuitable for directions, research the strengthening of rankings should not evaluating scientists, are quality, and collaboration be used (the not used for evaluating collaboration networks. networks. the indicators used in scientific research and heads of scientific evaluation is focused these rankings should scientists. this will help the groups form annual on scientific interest not be used for research community and tasks based on scientific directions and evaluating individual research organizations activity results, collaboration with researchers). independently form strengthening organizations that evaluation practices instead partnerships with have accumulated of following criteria and organizations that have significant methodologies set by significant scientific experience in the external commercial expertise in specific respective fields. companies. metrics do not scientific interest always reflect the quality of directions, rather than research results, their focusing on research significance, and their organization rankings. impact on society. 4. allocate resources the purpose of this 4.1. plan the budget 4.1. the planned x x x for the reform of commitment is to ensure for 2026–2028, budget for 2026– research evaluation that organizations allocate dedicated to carrying 2028, necessary to necessary for the the necessary resources out the reform of implement the organizational (budget or staff capacity) to research evaluation, reform of research changes committed to improve research including both evaluation and to being implemented. evaluation practices within administrative and include both the agreed timeframe. this academic staff. administrative and commitment aims to ensure academic staff as that each organization needed. allocates as many resources as needed to implement changes that allow adherence to principles and fulfillment of commitments. 5. review and criteria set for departments 5.1. review and update 5.1. updated x x x develop research and institutions. the evaluation criteria evaluation criteria, evaluation criteria, by directly involving for research considering the tools, and processes. researchers at all stages of departments, specifics of research their careers, review and considering coara activities of different develop the evaluation principles. departments, criteria for research ensuring responsible departments and use of metrics and organizations conducting interoperability. scientific research, while 5.2. conduct 5.2. improved and x x promoting interoperability. consultations with adapted evaluation this commitment will research groups and criteria and processes ensure that national, project leaders to that reflect the regional, and organizational identify existing diversity of activities institutions and evaluation evaluation of research groups agencies review and, if shortcomings and and projects, necessary, develop the improve the evaluation ensuring the evaluation criteria for criteria and processes importance of departments and for research projects and context in evaluating organizations conducting groups. scientific projects. research activities according to principles. this will promote the responsible use of metrics in evaluating research departments and organizations and help avoid contradictions or inconsistencies between research evaluation, researchers, and research- performing organizations. it will also ensure the interoperability of adapted or newly created evaluation processes. criteria set for projects and scientists. by directly involving researchers at all career stages in preparing to review and develop evaluation criteria, tools, and processes for research projects, research groups, and their members, adapted to their application context. this commitment will allow for the recognition of diverse research activities and practices by reviewing and improving evaluation criteria, tools, and processes. it will ensure that organizations review their processes and make tangible changes by creating existing or new evaluation methods individually or in collaboration with others, following principles. 6. increase awareness the aim of this 6.1. publicly publish 6.1. publicly x of research commitment is to ensure guidelines for the accessible evaluation reform that organizations provide criteria, tools, and guidelines for and ensure all participants with processes of scientific scientific research transparent sufficient knowledge about research evaluation, evaluation, which information, the reform. intended for both transparently define guidance, and this commitment aims to researchers and the evaluation training about ensure that organizations evaluators, ensuring criteria, processes, evaluation criteria transparently inform about transparency and and tools used. and processes and the criteria, tools, and dissemination of their application. processes applied in the knowledge about the evaluation of scientific goals of the reform. research and train researchers and evaluators to use them. organizations should inform about the evaluation processes and the tools and criteria used, publicly publish guidelines for evaluation methods, and train participants in the evaluation process. they should allow evaluated individuals to familiarize themselves with the criteria, data, and deliberation results used in the evaluation, while adhering to confidentiality requirements. 7. exchange practices the goal of this 7.1. organize periodic 7.1. regularly x x x x x x x x and experiences to commitment is to ensure experience exchange organized facilitate mutual that organizations exchange visits/events with other experience learning both within information and use it for national and exchange the coalition and mutual learning. by international research visits/events, beyond. exchanging insights, institutions participating promoting practices, and strategies in coara activities, continuous learning with institutions aiming to exchange and collaboration implementing coara practices and learn among institutions commitments, both from each other. implementing nationally and within the coara coalition, they can learn commitments, from each other, creating a creating a more unified system and unified evaluation overcoming emerging system. challenges. this 7.2. participate in 7.2. participation in x x x x x x x x commitment will ensure national and national and that organizations exchange international coara international coara information and use it for trainings. trainings. mutual learning. it will help avoid fragmentation and allow more advanced participants to share methods and experiences. 8. report / announce this commitment will 8.2. publish 8.2. publicly x x x x progress related to ensure that organizations information on announced adherence to provide each other with up- progress achieved, information about principles and to-date information on the publicizing results and achieved results and implementation progress made. it will implemented changes future plans, thus commitments. encourage thorough self- through both internal promoting trust and reflection and monitoring, and external adherence to adherence to principles, and communication commitments within progress in fulfilling channels, involving the the mal commitments. mal scientific community. community as well as the entire community.
