accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 aidea coara action plan 2025-2029 date 21/10/2025 aidea (accademia italiana di economia aziendale) applied to coara the 3rd of june 2024 and received the approval the 4th of october of the same year. aidea joined the national chapter in october 2024. by signing the coara agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), aidea aims to reform the assessment of research practices, by recognizing the diverse outputs, practices and activities and enhancing the quality and impact of research. in alignment with the arra, the research assessments may concern universities and research units, research projects, and individual scholars. aidea includes more than 1,500 scholars – mostly assistant, associate and full professors – from various disciplinary areas: i.e., business administration and management (economia aziendale), management (economia e gestione delle imprese), finance (finanza aziendale), organization studies (organizzazione aziendale), financial markets and institutions (economia degli intermediari finanziari) and working in italian universities. aidea operates according to an ‘aggregated’ governance model, aimed at building on and providing value to the academic societies composed by business professors like: • società italiana dei docenti di ragioneria e di economia aziendale (sidrea); • società italiana di management (sima); • associazione dei docenti di economia degli intermediari e dei mercati finanziari e finanza d'impresa (adeimf); • associazione italiana di organizzazione aziendale (assioa); • accademia italiana di scienze merceologiche (aisme); • società italiana di marketing (sim); • società italiana di storia della ragioneria (sisr). this governance model aims at fulfilling the main strategic goals: • define and defend the cultural and methodological specificity of business scholars; • promote the collaboration, the valorisation, and the respect for the specificities of all scientific societies related to business; • develop joint projects among scientific societies in order to improve the overall efficiency. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 the starting point currently aidea has formulated some key recommendations concerning research in its statute and code of ethics (see the appendix) that cover some of the key points included in coara’s arra. coara’s principles for overarching conditions: • ethics and integrity rules and practices. the aidea code of ethics (aidea coe) art. 3.2, first part, states that: “members are committed to respect the highest ethical standards in the selection and adoption of research methods, as well as in the dissemination and use of results”. • safeguard freedom of scientific research. the aidea coe art. 3.2., second part, implicitly embraces the principle of freedom of scientific research by stating that its “members carry out scientific research” with the sole constraints of adopting “rigorous methods and pursuing excellence at national and international level”. the code of ethics could articulate this principle more explicitly. • respect the autonomy of research organizations. this point could be better framed in the code of ethics. • ensure independence and transparency of the data, infrastructure, and criteria necessary for research assessment and for determining research impacts. this point could be better framed in the code of ethics. about the principles for assessment criteria and processes: a) quality and impact • focus research assessment criteria on quality. the aidea coe art. 2.2 states that: “members operate with responsibility, transparency and intellectual honesty for the advancement of knowledge and the excellence of the scientific community”. the aidea art. 7.4 states that: “in the evaluation of research outputs, members pay particular attention to the adoption of the procedures and methodologies identified and approved by the academy”. • the aidea coe art. 3.3 states that: “members refrain from any behaviour that may give rise to suspicions of scientific and literary plagiarism, meaning the intentional attribution to themselves or to another author of words, ideas, research or discoveries of others, regardless of the language in which these are officially presented or disclosed; to this end, they always meticulously cite the sources, including their own previous works”. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 • recognize the contributions that advance knowledge and the (potential) impact of research results. the aidea coe art. 3.5 states that: “members direct their scientific activity and guide their research group to provide a concrete contribution to the advancement of business knowledge, avoiding any practice of mystification. members promote research activities and the growth of scholars who collaborate with them”. b) diversity, inclusiveness and collaboration • recognize the diversity of research activities and practices, with a diversity of outputs, and reward early sharing and open collaboration. the aidea coe art. 2.3 states that: “members are committed to promote merit, respect and value diversity of all kinds, and promote equal opportunities in research and academic pursuits”. • use assessment criteria and processes that respect the variety of scientific disciplines, research types, as well as research career stage. the aidea coe art. 7.2 states that: “in this capacity, members operate with absolute intellectual honesty and correctness, carrying out their role accurately, transparently, completely and impartially, paying the utmost attention to avoiding any prejudice”. the code of ethics could explicitly acknowledge the value of multi-, inter-, and trans- disciplinary as well as inter-sectoral approaches, when applicable. • acknowledge and valorise the diversity in research roles and careers, including roles outside academia. the aidea coe art. 3.4 states that: “members recognize merit and visibility appropriate to the effective contribution of all those who collaborate on a research project. they refrain from appearing as an author, or from including other subjects as authors in works to which they have not made an effective contribution”. • ensure gender equality, equal opportunities and inclusiveness. the aidea coe art. 1.2 states that: “aidea directs its activity towards innovation, equity, sustainability, inclusion and transparency, giving voice to the diversity that characterizes it in all its forms, and calls on its members to recognize and respect the dignity and rights of individuals, and to accept the duties and responsibilities that derive from their status in society and institutions, as well as from the associative bond”. the aidea coe art. 2.3 states that: “members are committed to promote merit, respect and value diversity of all kinds, and promote equal opportunities in research and academic pursuits”. • the aidea coe art. 2.4 states that: “members are committed to promote interventions favouring the personal and professional growth of students with disabilities or in uncomfortable situations, and the accessibility and full inclusion in university and academic life of all students. members also are committed to conform their action to this code of ethics and to other acts and documents deliberated by the academy”. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 • the aidea coe art. 2.5 states that: “in no case members will use the authority and the power that derive from their position and office to discriminate or cause harm or adopt harassing or humiliating behaviour towards any other person. similarly, members will not seek advantages for themselves or other subjects with whom they have family, emotional or economic ties by acting in contrast with current regulations and (national and international) best practices”. in the coming years, aidea is committed to develop its practices in agreement with arra’s principles. the board of aidea will identify the main gaps in relation to arra’s principles and will develop new practices or revise/integrate the code of ethics accordingly. as the aidea board includes the presidents of all italian academic societies in business, this process may leverage on the knowledge and practices of those academic societies. finally, once the proposal will be approved by the board, the new practices and/or the revisions/integrations of the code of ethics will be presented and eventually approved by the aidea annual meeting. the new practices and the revised code of ethics will be published on aidea’s website, will be sent by email to all members and will be presented at the annual general meeting. they will integrate the existing principles guiding the behaviour of its members in relation to research practices and assessment. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 core commitments 1. , purpose – to broaden the recognition of the diverse practices, activities and careers in research. current status – in the scientific fields covered by aidea, all type of research contributions (e.g., books, book chapters, journal articles) are evaluated both within the framework of the “vqr” (the italian national research quality assessment, a nationwide evaluation exercise conducted by the national agency for the evaluation of universities and research institutes) and within the national procedures for the recruitment and promotion to the positions of assistant professor tenure track, associate professor or full professor. in addition, candidates are also assessed based on their diverse contributions to research projects (granting funds, collecting data, analysing data, leading and coordinating the project), their teaching and their broader societal engagement activities, including knowledge transfer, innovation, and public outreach. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our action to broaden the recognition of the diverse practices, activities, and careers in research. 2. . purpose - to enable research assessment criteria that focus primarily on quality, while recognising the responsible use of quantitative indicators. current status – in the scientific fields covered by aidea, the assessment of the quality of research at the department level (vqr), at the individual level and at the project level mostly relies on peer review and qualitative assessment. the use of quantitative indicators and journal classifications (e.g., a-level and/or aidea-vqr 2020-24 journal rankings) complements and supports the qualitative assessment. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our efforts to promote research assessment criteria that prioritise quality while recognising the responsible use of quantitative indicators. 3. , . purpose - reduce the dominance of a narrow set of quantitative journal- and publication-based metrics. current status – as business disciplines are not considered bibliometric, research assessment at the department, individual and project-level is not based exclusively or mostly on bibliometric indicators such as the journal impact factor (jif) or the h-index. rather, research quality is assessed through aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 peer review and a range of qualitative criteria, including the originality, methodological soundness, and theoretical contribution of the work, as well as its relevance and impact within both academic and societal contexts. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our efforts to abandon the overreliance on a narrow range of quantitative, journal- and publication-based metrics. 4. . purpose - avoid that metrics used by international rankings may be applied to research and researcher assessment. current status – in the scientific fields covered by aidea, the assessment of research at the department, individual and project level is only to a very limited extent based on international rankings of universities and business schools. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our efforts to discourage the use of international rankings in research assessment processes. 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to purpose – to ensure that organisations allocate the necessary (financial or human) resources to improve research assessment practices. current status - aidea promotes the commitment of academic societies and research institutions to dedicate sufficient financial and human resources to improving research assessment practices. this includes supporting initiatives such as seminars, conferences, and workshops that foster awareness and dialogue on responsible research evaluation. particular attention is given to the dissemination of knowledge regarding the dangerous phenomenon of predatory journals and conferences, understood as deceptive outlets that charge publication or participation fees without providing genuine peer review or ensuring academic quality. through these initiatives, aidea contributes to promoting integrity, transparency, and ethical standards in research communication and evaluation. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our efforts in this direction. aidea aims to further promote responsible research assessment, enhance the dissemination of knowledge on research integrity, and support initiatives that raise awareness of the spread and risks of unethical publication practices. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 6. 6.1 criteria for units and institutions - with the direct involvement of research organisations and researchers at all career stages, review and develop criteria for assessing research units and research performing organisations, while promoting interoperability purpose - this commitment will ensure that national / regional / organisational authorities and evaluation agencies review and develop criteria for the assessment of research performing units and organisations coherent with arra’s principles. current status – in the scientific fields covered by aidea, the “vqr” (the italian national research quality assessment) relies on peer review to assess the quality of research at the department level in italy, . so, while it is beyond the power of aidea to influence anvur, we think that the system in place is consistent with these principles. furthermore, aidea organizes meetings and roundtables with the representatives of the main national institutions that define the criteria and processes for the assessment of research performing units and organizations. aidea will try to influence the evolution of the principles and rules in this area in a direction that is coherent with arra’s principles. action (no change is needed): continue and strengthen our efforts to promote criteria for the assessment of research performing units and organisations that are consistent with arra’s principles. 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers - with the direct involvement of researchers at all career stages, review and develop criteria, tools and processes for the assessment of research projects, research teams and researchers that are adapted to their context of application purpose - to enable recognition of the diverse research activities and practices through the revision and development of assessment criteria and processes current status - aidea, through the full engagement of representatives of the seven learned societies that are part of the federation, has developed a document entitled “l’accademico nelle discipline economico aziendali”1 that describes the different career stages of individual academics, the different possible research products and projects they are encouraged to work on, and the main criteria for research assessment in the field of business studies in italy. these criteria are fully coherent with the arra principles. action (no change is needed): continue to organize meetings and workshops with academic and institutional representatives to diffuse a widespread acceptance of research project and product assessment in line with the arra principles in the field of business studies in italy. 1 https://societaitalianamanagement.it/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/aidea-laccademico-nelle-discipline-economico- aziendali-24.10.2023-1.pdf aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 7. purpose - to ensure that organisations raise awareness of the reform among all actors. current status – aidea actively promotes a larger awareness of research assessment reform by promoting sessions at the annual conferences of academic societies, by creating a dialogue with national institutions, and by teaching responsible research practices to younger scholars within research schools. action (no change is needed): aidea is committed to increase the awareness of research assessment reform within its members. 8. purpose – to ensure organisations exchange and make use of information for mutual learning. current status – aidea consists of several academic societies which informally exchange practices and experiences to foster mutual learning. during its conferences, aidea has repeatedly hosted roundtables with outstanding international scholars whose main contribution lays withing the field of research assessment and who are aligned with the arra perspective. action (no change is needed): aidea will continue to promote both formal and informal discussions on research practices and experiences aimed at fostering a broad exchange of practices and experiences. such discussions are aimed to share and build on the experience and knowledge of academics, representatives of research assessment institutions or actors responsible for public policy with specific expertise regards research assessment practices and criteria. 9. purpose – to ensure organisations update one another on the progress made. current status – aidea does not formally touch these issues in detail during board meetings. action – starting from next year, aidea will organize more formal meetings and events where the various academic societies can communicate their adherence to the principles and any issue they experienced in the process of modifying the criteria underlying research assessment. a forum of scholars in charge of organizing research seminars for junior faculty could be particularly fruitful. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 10. , purpose – to ensure that assessment approach decisions are evidence informed. current status – aidea does not formally and routinary discuss practices and criteria based on state- of-the-art. however, aidea supports and diffuses extensively the results of the periodic national research evaluation campaigns (vqr) and the thorough analysis of the trends, tendencies, and specificities of the field of business study research products and their evaluation processes. action – italy’s research organizations are currently undergoing a vqr campaign. aidea contributed to the process of research evaluation by suggesting changes to enhance the validity and the adherence to the arra principles of the research evaluation process defined by the italian agency for research evaluation (anvur). once the process is over (in 2026), aidea will contribute to diffuse the results of this campaign and will support a further analysis of the results obtained overall in the assessment of research products in the field of business studies, their specificities and any anomaly that may be worth focusing to enhance the quality of research evaluation processes and criteria in the future. starting from next year, aidea will further strengthen the dialogue with anvur on how to evolve current practices and favor the dissemination of best practices among aidea members since the next year. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 appendix extracts from aidea’s statute and code of ethics updated at may 2025 the art. 2 of aidea statute states that: “the object of the academy is the study, application, progress and dissemination of economic-business disciplines; the implementation of any initiative that may allow the pursuit of that purpose, including those of support for the training, research and teaching of young scholars with particular attention to university activities, as well as any intervention to express opinions regarding the organization of business studies and any legislative proposal or public regulation pertaining to economic-business subjects”. the aidea code of ethics underlines the core values of the organization at the art. 1: • art. 1.2: “aidea directs its activity towards innovation, equity, sustainability, inclusion and transparency, giving voice to the diversity that characterizes it in all its forms, and calls on its members to recognize and respect the dignity and rights of individuals, and to accept the duties and responsibilities that derive from their status in society and institutions, as well as from the associative bond”. the code of ethics also regulates the behaviour of its members at the art. 2: • art. 2.2: “members operate with responsibility, transparency and intellectual honesty for the advancement of knowledge and the excellence of the scientific community”. • art. 2.3 “members are committed to promote merit, respect and value diversity of all kinds, and promote equal opportunities in research and academic pursuits”. • art 2.4 “members are committed to promote interventions favouring the personal and professional growth of students with disabilities or in uncomfortable situations, and the accessibility and full inclusion in university and academic life of all students. members also are committed to conform their action to this code of ethics and to other acts and documents deliberated by the academy”. • art 2.5 “in no case members will use the authority and the power that derive from their position and office to discriminate or cause harm or adopt harassing or humiliating behaviour towards any other person. similarly, members will not seek advantages for themselves or other subjects with whom they have family, emotional or economic ties by acting in contrast with current regulations and (national and international) best practices”. in the section about the research activity, the code of ethics states that: • art. 3.1 “members consider research activities as an essential and constitutive part of their commitment, ensure the updating of their scientific production, as well as the link between research and teaching”. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377 accademia italiana di economia aziendale fondata nel 1813 • art. 3.2 “members carry out scientific research according to rigorous methods and pursuing excellence at national and international level. members are committed to respect the highest ethical standards in the selection and adoption of research methods, as well as in the dissemination and use of results”. • art. 3.3 “members refrain from any behaviour that may give rise to suspicions of scientific and literary plagiarism, meaning the intentional attribution to themselves or to another author of words, ideas, research or discoveries of others, regardless of the language in which these are officially presented or disclosed; to this end, they always meticulously cite the sources, including their own previous works”. • art. 3.4 “members recognize merit and visibility appropriate to the effective contribution of all those who collaborate on a research project. they refrain from appearing as an author, or from including other subjects as authors in works to which they have not made an effective contribution”. • art. 3.5 “members direct their scientific activity and guide their research group to provide a concrete contribution to the advancement of business knowledge, avoiding any practice of mystification. members promote research activities and the growth of scholars who collaborate with them”. in the section about reviewing and assessing scholars, the code of ethics states that: • art. 7.1 “members may be called to evaluate the university education, the academic curricula, and the overall scientific activity of individuals, and to review or judge individual research products”. • art. 7.2 “in this capacity, members operate with absolute intellectual honesty and correctness, carrying out their role accurately, transparently, completely and impartially, paying the utmost attention to avoiding any prejudice”. • art. 7.3 “with regard to the overall research activity or individual outputs, members weigh their positioning and attribute adequate importance to the enhancement and contribution to the growth of original italian business studies also in international contexts”. • art. 7.4 “in the evaluation of research outputs, members pay particular attention to the adoption of the procedures and methodologies identified and approved by the academy”. aidea – piazza de’ calderini, 2/2 – 40124 bologna – tel. 051 558798 segreteria@accademiaaidea.it – www.accademiaaidea.it c.f. 00698690377
