queen mary university of london coara action plan preamble queen mary university of london joined coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) in 2022. our action plan captures the activity that has taken place across the university since then, drawing it together into a programme of work which we will review, iterate and develop to enhance the ways we promote and engage with responsible research assessment (rra). coara principle guidance points from coara action timeframe recognise the diversity of • how does your organisation • through our r&i awards, ongoing contributions to, and careers in, plan to enable recognition of we recognise the diversity research in accordance with the more diverse contributions to of contributions to needs and nature of the research research? research, including from • how does your organisation ps and technicians, plan to enable greater diversity in alongside ecrs. the award career paths and profiles? criteria embed our commitments to responsible research assessment and dora. • enhance our commitment ongoing to increasing diversity in our researcher pipeline, and to sharing our best practice with other institutions. • progress the technicians ongoing commitment action plan, including our commitment to supporting technical career development. • review and make in place by september 2026 improvements to the ways we recognise a wide range of research and innovation activities (including contributions to impact/ke, responsible research, and to research culture). • conduct training sessions and activities to expand ongoing researchers’ understandings of diverse career paths, with tailored sessions for different groups, specifically referencing hr excellence in research • continue work to recognise all contributions ongoing to outputs via the credit taxonomy, and develop the integration between systems and processes to capture this base research assessment • how does your organisation • affirm our commitment to ongoing primarily on qualitative evaluation plan to actively engage in and using narrative for which peer review is central, learn from research on research submissions to support supported by responsible use of work? appraisal and probation. quantitative indicators • how does your organisation plan to accommodate qualitative • embed peer review as the ongoing evaluation mechanisms and base basis of selection of the use of metrics in a way that is outputs and impact case aligned with your organisation’s studies for ref. value system? • develop and/or deliver training to increase ongoing recognition of open research and its value • encourage, monitor and support the university’s ongoing open research policies • keep abreast of and actively review research ongoing on research and innovation to identify insights we can use. abandon inappropriate uses in • how does your organisation • ensure unconscious bias ongoing research assessment of journal- plan to mitigate reliance on jif training is available to all and publication-based metrics, in and h-index? assessors of research and particular inappropriate uses of researchers, and journal impact factor (jif) and h- additional specialist index training is provided for reviewers of research outputs and impact case studies for ref. ongoing • embed principles into training for developing and using narrative cvs avoid the use of rankings of • how does your organisation • embed principles into research organisations in plan to mitigate reliance on training for developing and ongoing research assessment organisation rankings? using narrative cvs commit resources to reforming • which resources will your • use our preparations for ongoing research assessment as is institution allocate to the ref and associated needed to achieve the implementation of the research training to embed and organisational changes assessment reform? (whether in reinforce our commitment committed to terms of capacity or budget, to to responsible research actively engage in the reform assessment. journey) • establish the research september 2025 and innovation operations group as the steering group for the coara action plan, reporting through the eo r&i review and develop research • does your organisation plan to • extend the mentoring september 2025 assessment criteria, tools and pilot or implement alternative/ support available in processes new assessment criteria, tools, promotions to enhance and processes (e.g. narrative cv engagement with narrative format, competency-based cv cvs, building on training format, evidence-based cv we already provide to format, diversification of research some groups (e.g. pgrs). careers and associated career progression)? • invest resources in ongoing establishing and monitoring a more holistic view of research outputs and impacts. • provide guidance on open ongoing research practices and the benefits of open research to all research assessors, research staff and students. • provide mentoring to ongoing postdoctoral researchers and to other researchers to support them in their academic career development. raise awareness of research • does your institution plan to • communicate changes in ongoing assessment reform and provide provide training, guidance and assessments through transparent communication, support to assessment panels, academic career pathways guidance, and training on committees, and juries? to all staff who will be assessment criteria and assessed and who will processes as well as their use undertake assessments. • embed coara activity into ongoing research and innovation culture action plans. exchange practices and • how does your organisation • join the national chapter ongoing experiences to enable mutual plan to exchange practices and of coara and participate learning within and beyond the foster exchange of good practices fully in sharing of best coalition in national and international practise in research contexts? assessments • continue working with ongoing sector bodies to share our good practice, and identify other opportunities to do so. for example, sharing our work on reasonable adjustments and training and development for pgrs, sharing case studies of postdoc support through the vitae international conference. communicate progress made on • how will your organisation • publish coara action plan once approved, target adherence to the principles and ensure the transparent on university and coara autumn 2025 implementation of the communication of the webpages, along with an commitments organisation’s research annual update on evaluation processes within and progress. outside of the organisation? • deliver an annual update on activity taken and once approved, target change made to research autumn 2026 and innovation board. • disseminate our commitments to academic, technical and once approved, target professional staff, autumn 2025 providing regular updates and mechanisms for colleagues to input to the plan. • act on feedback from each annual review to enhance and embed new processes once approved, target successfully. autumn 2026 evaluate practices, criteria and • how does your institution plans • eo r&i and research ongoing tools based on solid evidence to monitor and (re)evaluate its culture team to remain and the state-of-the-art in assessment criteria, tools, and abreast of latest evidence research on research, and make processes? what will be the and best practice in rra. data openly available for frequency? evidence gathering and research who will be involved in the • play an active role in the ongoing evaluation? coara coalition, working groups and the uk national chapter • continue to contribute to ongoing the uk reproducibility network open and responsible researcher reward and recognition project (or4).
