introduction the university of pannonia (up) is committed to responsible the action plan was developed by the coara working group of up, research assessment, the continuous maintenance of scientific which was composed of the members of the scientific committee excellence and the highest standards of scientific ethics. our and the delegates of group of young rersearchers. the progress membership of the coalition for advancing research assessment of the action plan will be discussed monthly at the meeting of the (coara) reflects our commitment to implementing and scientific committee. the action plan is shared and discussed by maintaining a research environment that takes into account the the up community and approved by the rector’s council. diverse contributions of different disciplines in assessing scientific quality, and also to creating an environment that inspires future the up is continuously improving its evaluation system, which is generations of researchers. reviewed every year. in line with the principles of coara, the up has developed this the review is methodologically supported by the scientific quality action plan to make our transition towards a more transparent, analysis group and carried out by the coara working group. fair and high-quality research evaluation practice that is focused, efficient and accountable. this document presents the main objectives and implementation steps necessary to establish the up’s research assessment on the basis of the coara principles. by implementing the tasks outlined in the action plan and by continuously improving our internal processes in a quality-driven manner, the goal of up is to create a transparent system of research evaluation that will serve as a reference for regional institutions, inspire and support our researchers and contribute effectively to building international collaborations. actions (2025-2028) status (march 2025) responsibility coara core commitments 1. incorporation of the coara principles into the quality policy statement of the university. coara working group has been set up from the members of the rector coara working group scientific committee and the recognise the diversity delegates of group of young of contributions to, and scientists. careers in research, in accordance with the development of a new university employee assessment steering committees on coara working group needs and nature of the and an integrated talent and career management academic performance and talent talent management research system, with a special focus on diverse career pathways, management have been set up. council backgrounds (including social conditions, gender, research resources and support availability) and steering committee on scientific performance indicators (e.g., innovation, academic performance patents, tutoring, public scientific activity, practical experience, etc.), including a framework for the recognition of the achievements of staff in research support roles (communication, advice, data processing and preparation). 2. we declare that no evaluation will be based solely on numerical (scientometric) measures, but rather on rector coara working group substance and quality. furthermore, the evaluation base research should also recognize the sustainability, social, and assessment primarily economic impact of research results. on qualitative evaluation for which peer review compilation of guidelines for peers assessing theses, is central, supported job applications and promotions, and for the leaders of by responsible use of departments and/or research groups. quantitative indicators 3. development of an integrated evaluation and career pathway support system based on a wide range of steering committees on academic performance and talent rector coara working group quantitative indicators (which takes into account management have been set up. abandon inappropriate talent management the specificities of scientific disciplines). research uses in research council evaluation will be based not only on these numerical assessment of journal- indicators and related target values, but on a jointly steering committee on and publication-based developed and continuously reviewed system that academic performance metrics, in particular allows for the evaluation of the quality of scientific inappropriate uses of achievements and career paths. journal impact factor (jif) and h-index actions (2025-2028) status (march 2025) responsibility coara core commitments 4. in the newly developed university research assessment system, the research organisation will be considered rector internationalisation as only one part of the diversity of career backgrounds avoid the use of committee that can significantly influence research opportunities. rankings of research organisations in we declare that we do not produce internal coara working group research assessment organisational rankings, we give organisations contextualised targets, set in the light of their own development and improvement, which, even if quantified (kpis), are continuously monitored for underlying content and we pay particular attention to content-based monitoring of trends (where the trends are evaluated based on the maturity and environment of the research group). we declare that we do not seek to improve rankings positions for their own sake and reject any such activities, especially those that violate scientific ethics. at the institutional level, we do not look at institutional rankings, but at the indicators behind them, and more specifically at the processes involved. we rate the maturity of the development of these processes, and the related analyses aim to support benchmarking activities. declaration that the university pays attention to the rankings but considers the rankings as a tool for quality improvement only and focuses on substance rather than indicators. progress in the rankings is only possible through ethically acceptable actions, as a result of quality improvement actions. development of recommendations on how to avoid the pitfalls of international rankings. actions (2025-2028) status (march 2025) responsibility coara core commitments 5. the institution will allocate resources for the development of an evaluation system and related centre of excellence has been set up. rector senate skills of the evaluators and for the establishment and commit resources to scientific quality analysis group maintenance of the necessary structures. budget committee reforming research has been set up. assessment as is as part of this work, it maintains a dedicated scientific centre of excellence scientific quality analysis group needed to achieve the quality analysis group, with experts in science metrics coara working group has been set up. organisational changes and science policy, to communicate with coara committed to working group and to develop the methodology and management of the scientific evaluation system. creation of a group talent management within the centre of excellence. the institution will also allocate resources for training of evaluators, integrated into the training system. 6. development of research evaluation criteria for the assessment of research groups and institutions that rector coara working group consider the nature of the unit (e.g. educational or review and develop research focus), its fundraising activities, profile, project directorate research assessment organisational balance and mentoring activities, in criteria, tools and addition to the science metrics. the evaluation criteria processes include the activities of the supporting organisations and the resources available. 6.1 criteria for units and institutions development of project evaluation criteria that 6.2 criteria for projects considers the possibilities of applied research, the applicability of results, local capacity development, and and researchers its ability to inspire further research projects. compilation of a guide for peers organisational units and projects, and for the leaders of departments, research groups and faculties. actions (2025-2028) status (march 2025) responsibility coara core commitments 7. dedicated coara website within the homepage of research excellence network. research excellence network raise awareness of in-house promotion of coara, encouragement of coara working group research assessment joining working groups. research ethics reform and provide research ethics committee publishes committee transparent recommendations, shares experiences, draws attention communication, to negative trends. we believe it is important to create guidance, and training a transparent, motivating and supportive environment, on assessment criteria based on open communication, sharing of experiences and processes as well as and suggestions on how to avoid scientific ethics their use misconduct and self-serving scientific work. in the case of unintentional and systematic scientific ethics misconduct, sanction is of a different nature and it is more important to create solutions and an environment that supports the recognition and avoidance of mistakes. availability of job and promotion requirements and assessment guidelines on university and faculty websites. compiling a guide on how to avoid poor publishing practices. scientific ethics training for phd and undergraduate students. organisation of workshops to introduce the new types of evaluation criteria, to make them more transparent and to collect feedback from employees. actions (2025-2028) status (march 2025) responsibility coara core commitments 8. participation of university of pannonia in coara working groups. coara working group individual exchange practices participation of up in european alliances. researchers and experiences to participation of up in national and regional networks. enable mutual learning within and beyond the coalition 9. dedicated coara website within the homepage of research excellence network coara working group research excellence communicate progress semi-annual progress report by the coara working network made on adherence group to the rector’s council. sharing of report on to the principles and coara web. implementation of the report on coara at the annual staff meetings by commitments the rector. this way not only the researchers but supporting organizations are also informed. annual report for the maintainer on progress of coara. 10. extension of a framework for the continuous monitoring and self-monitoring of the assessment coara working group centre of excellence system. the results of monitoring will be available on evaluate practices, the coara website for evidence gathering and research criteria and tools based purposes. on solid ev-idence and the state-of-the-art in research on research,
