coara action plan (2025-2028) reforming research assessment april 2025 1 contents 1. preamble 3 2. context 3 3. reforming research assessment 4 4. our vision 5 4.1 open science at the udl 5 4.2 scope 6 4.3 continuous improvement through assessment 6 5. actions 7 5.1 outline 7 5.2 management and supervision 12 6. references 12 2 1. preamble the university of lleida (udl) became a member of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) in march 2023. the udl has also publicly committed itself to revising the current procedures for responsible research assessment (rra) by signing the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) promoted by coara. this document describes the action plan that the udl is committed to implementing between 2025 and 2028, which was approved by the consell de govern on 30 april 2025, following a process of internal consultation and participation. the guidelines provided in support for coara signatories in the preparation of action plans have been taken into account in the preparation of this action plan. 2. context on 1 december 2022, the coalition for the advancement of research assessment (coara) was formally established as an international european association comprising all signatory institutions (around 370). today (april 2025), more than 800 organizations are members of coara, including universities, research centres and associations, research funding agencies and national and regional research assessment agencies, as well as scientific associations and academic staff. building on the discussions and consensus of the international community, coara aims to systematically reform research assessment and improve assessment practices through the application of common principles and clear commitments that should produce results in the coming years. coara is based on a broad consensus in the research community that a reform of research assessment is necessary to promote sustainable research quality and strengthen research cultures. coara stems from initiatives such as the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora, 2013), the leiden manifesto (2015) and the metric tide report (2016), which have unanimously highlighted the consequences of poor research assessment practices, including the application of narrow quality criteria leading to biased incentives and unbearable pressures on researchers. coara's focus is on 'responsible research assessment', an umbrella term for assessment approaches that encourage, reflect and reward the pluralistic characteristics of high quality research in order to support diverse and inclusive research cultures. while responsible research assessment practices should help to keep pace with the increasing demands placed on research by the many societal, environmental, democratic and economic challenges we face, coara recognises that these practices are context sensitive, meaning that research organisations retain their autonomy and can design assessments that promote their institutional values. the work of coara is organized into groups dealing with specific topics, such as academic careers, infrastructure, multilingualism, and accountability metrics, and also 3 into national chapters. in spain, the spanish national chapter was officially launched in february 2024 under the leadership of the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca), the conference of rectors of spanish universities (crue) and the spanish national research council (csic), with the support of the ministry of science, innovation and universities, and with the participation of 76 organizations, including the udl. the spanish chapter has taken into account the contributions made in the national forum on reforming research assessment, which met in barcelona in january 2023. 3. reforming research assessment the primary objective of this action plan is to improve the quality and impact of the research carried out at the udl by aligning it with the coara commitments. to this end, the action plan will be based on the following general principles1:  adhere to ethics and integrity rules and practices as a matter of the highest priority.  safeguard the freedom of scientific research and respect the autonomy of research organisations.  ensure the independence and transparency of the data, infrastructure and criteria needed to evaluate research and determine its impact.  focus research assessment criteria on quality, rewarding originality of ideas, professional research conduct and results beyond the state of the art.  reward research behaviours that support open science practices such as data sharing and open collaboration within science and societal stakeholders.  recognise the contributions that advance knowledge and the (potential) impact of research results, prioritising quality over quantity.  use assessment criteria and procedures that respect the diversity of scientific disciplines, types of research and career stages, and that recognise multi‐, inter‐ and transdisciplinarity.  ensure gender equality, equal opportunities and inclusiveness, as well as diversity in a broader sense (e.g. ethnic origin, sexual orientation, socio‐ economic, disability) at all levels. the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) promoted by coara is based on the implementation of ten commitments, divided into four core commitments and six supporting commitments. shared commitments to research assessment reform, to be achieved by signatory institutions within an agreed timeframe of five years from 2024, will enable recognition of the different outcomes, practices and activities that maximise the quality of research and its resulting impact, facilitate a move away from the inappropriate use of journal‐ and publication‐based metrics, and strengthen trust in research. 4 commitments 1 to 4 form the core of the reform agreement, and all subsequent actions in this action plan implicitly incorporate them. they provide a common direction for the reform of research assessment, while respecting the autonomy of organisations. these commitments are1: 1. recognize the diversity of contributions to, and careers in, . 2. . 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal‐ and publication‐ based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h‐ index. 4. avoid the use of rankings of research organizations in research assessment. the six supporting commitments are developed in detail in section 5 (“actions”) of this action plan. the implementation of the coara commitments in udl will involve a multi‐stage approach, as follows: 1. overseeing the implementation of the coara commitments through a committee or task force (hereafter referred to as the coara committee) composed of representatives of pdi staff (teaching and research) and pas staff (administration). 2. review current practices and develop procedures that are consistent with the coara commitments by emphasising the quality and impact of research, promoting open access, and recognising the diversity of research contributions. 3. organise information sessions on the new procedures for pdi (teaching and research) and ptgas (technical, management and administration and services) staff about the new procedures to ensure understanding of the coara commitments and how they will be implemented. 4. progressively implement changes in the way research is evaluated and how researchers are recognised and rewarded. 5. regularly monitor and adjust the implementation of the coara commitments and gather feedback from staff to make necessary adjustments. 6. regularly communicate progress on implementation to members of the institution, ensuring transparency and fostering a culture of openness and collaboration. 4. our vision 4.1 open science at the udl open science is at the heart of european research policy, and the udl is committed to promoting and supporting open science within the institution. the udl’s contribution to this movement is included in the strategic plan of the university of lleida 2030 and 5 is concretised by the open science policy of the university of lleida approved by its governing council in february 20232. the udl open science policy precedes and is in line with the catalan strategy for open science3, which was approved in december 2023. the policy focuses on the following areas of action: open access, research data, open educational resources, and citizen science, which are at the heart of the coara principle of diversity, inclusiveness and collaboration in the assessment of research. 4.2 scope the udl's commitment to responsible research assessment applies across the institution to processes and procedures in which research assessment takes place. in addition, the udl is mindful of the existing environment for research assessment at international and national levels. at the national level, the criteria for the evaluation of teaching and research staff are currently under review, following the changes introduced by losu (“ley orgánica 2/2023, de 22 de marzo, del sistema universitario”) and royal legislative decree 678/2023. this is an ongoing process that is expected to continue over the next few years, and will have a direct impact on the internal evaluation processes for pdi staff at the udl, which are also affected by current catalan policies based on luc (“llei 1/2003, de 19 de febrer, d'universitats de catalunya”), such as the serra húnter programme, an academic excellence programme that follows a selection process in line with international standards. for this reason, this action plan does not explicitly include the evaluation of the research activities of the teaching and research staff of our university. however, the action plan remains open to updating its scope following the planned annual reviews. in fact, the focus is on the revision and refinement of the udl's internal competitive research‐related calls, such as the assignment of technical support staff to research groups, the transitional research projects, or the selection of pre‐ and post‐doctoral researchers, among others. the evaluation of internal calls under the umbrella of the coara principles will also be in line with the university of lleida's strategic plan 2030, of which open science is a cornerstone. 4.3 continuous improvement through assessment among the underlying principles of the agreement on reforming research assessment, the signatories agree to “regularly demonstrate progress towards reviewing, developing and evaluating criteria, tools and processes that fulfil the core commitments, with a touch point at end of 2027 or within five years of signing the agreement, by which time they will have worked through at least one cycle of review and development of their assessment criteria, tools and processes.” the action plan presented here is in line with the principle of review and updating, which will be inspired by a catalogue of good practices in continuous development at catalan, national (through the spanish national chapter), european and international levels. 6 activities will also be undertaken to enable these good practices to be shared both internally and externally. 7 5. actions 5.1 outline the key actions of the udl action plan 2025‐2028 are summarized in the following table, which shows the six coara supporting commitments, the related action lines, the actions included in these lines, the timeframe and responsible party for each action, and the method of assessment. commitment action lines action timeframe responsible assessment 5. commit resources implement changes in coara action plan implementation 2025‐2028 coara committee bi‐annual meetings and to reforming research research assessment, and update. preparation of the assessment as is including planning and annual report. needed to achieve the progress monitoring. organizational changes committed to. implementation of the institutional 2025‐2028 open science annual review and open science policy document. committee update. annual monitoring of the action plan 2025‐2028 udl research monitoring of the by the udl research committee and committee (rc) annual report. the vice‐rectorate for research. 8 support the necessary new research portal as a basic 2025 it and review after one year infrastructure for the infrastructure for communication, communications following transparent collection analyse and dissemination of service & library implementation and and processing of data scientific activities. and documentation update, if needed. on research unit assessment practices. interoperability between cora 2025 it and (catalan open research area) and communications the new research portal. service & library and documentation unit 6. review and develop revision and continuous gradually introduce a research 2025‐2028 udl research explicit endorsement of research assessment updating of internal evaluation system based not only on committee (rc) the call by the coara criteria, tools and research calls (travel quantitative criteria but also on committee followed by processes. grants, transitional objective qualitative criteria. this an annual review and research projects….) should be adapted for each call analysis of the results and for pre‐ and post‐ according to its specificities (young from a coara doctoral candidates in researchers, less socially visible perspective. line with coara disciplines, etc.). guidelines. incorporate different expert points of 2025‐2028 rc view through panels that take into account the qualitative and quantitative value of the merits and 9 the diversity of the fields of knowledge, taking into account aspects such as the multilingualism of the contributions or the recognition of local studies or those written in catalan. consider open science compliance as 2025‐2028 rc a condition for proposals in internal calls. use and adapt the new research 2025‐2028 it and portal to evaluate the internal calls, communications not only at the data level (articles, service & library theses...), but also in terms of and documentation qualitative and open science aspects. unit 7. raise awareness of internal strategy for internal consultation and collection 2025 coara committee public exhibition and research assessment communicating the and analysis of changes. discussion of the draft reform and provide coara rationale. coara action plan. transparent communication, guidance, and training on assessment criteria 10 and processes as well as their use. disseminating the development of a specific 2025‐2028 coara committee communication action plan. communication strategy. strategy. training in the coara training actions related to research 2025‐2028 library and yearly training principles. assessment & open science. documentation activities. unit & doctoral school 8. exchange practices information sharing participation in coara's general 2025‐2028 coara committee annual summary of and experiences to and mutual learning assembly. participation. enable mutual within coara. learning within and beyond the coalition. participation in coara's spanish 2025‐2028 coara committee chapter. 11 participation in coara working 2025‐2028 coara committee groups and/or other similar national or international initiatives. 9. communicate monitoring and coara action plan to be published 2025 coara committee publication of the progress made on updating of progress to internally and externally. coara action plan on adherence to the be made publicly the udl website and in principles and available. the zenodo and udl implementation of the open repositories after commitments. approval. coara action plan to be regularly 2025‐2028 coara committee report annually on updated on compliance and progress. progress through the action plan and update as necessary. 10. evaluate practices, data sharing for practices, criteria, tools and results of 2025‐2028 coara committee publication on the udl criteria and tools evaluation of internal calls made publicly available. website. based on solid alternative research evidence and the assessments. state‐of‐the‐art in research on research, . 12 5.2 management and supervision actions to reform research assessment are the responsibility of the udl’s vice‐ rectorade for research. the coara action plan 2025‐2028 has been prepared by an ad hoc committee or task force (i.e. the coara committee) composed of the deputy vice‐rector for research, one pdi representative from each of the four strategic areas of the udl (agri‐food [represented by the deputy vice‐rector], biomedicine, social and territorial development, and technology and sustainability), one ptgas representative from the library and documentation unit and one ptgas representative from the research grants management unit. the plan is open for discussion according to the following stages:  review by the vice‐rector for research and the udl research committee  review by the udl executive board  internal consultation open to the entire university community  approval by the udl governing council the coara committee will be responsible for the annual implementation, monitoring and updating of the plan. twice a year, the coara committee will review the details of the actions undertaken in collaboration with the different actors involved (doctoral school, units and services). during the following six months, all completed and planned actions will be evaluated. the coara committee may update or delete actions and add new ones according to the needs of the udl, after the necessary consultation. the annual report on activities, highlighting any relevant changes to the plan, must be submitted to the udl research committee and executive board for review and made publicly available through coara. 6. references 1 agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) (2022) coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). 2 política de ciència oberta de la universitat de lleida (2023) universitat de lleida. 3 estratègia catalana de ciència oberta: compartir el coneixement (2023) departament de recerca i universitats. generalitat de catalunya. 13
