enressh notes coara action plan european network for research evaluation in the social sciences and humanities enressh and research evaluation stakeholder meeting and has immediately committed to the enressh was founded under the name evalhum in 2014 following actions: after having organised a series of conferences and workshops raise awareness for the need of reform of assessment on improving research evaluation with a special focus on better 1. enressh continues to actively raise awareness for the need valorising research and its impact on society. a special goal was of reform of research assessment procedures on the national, the recognition of research of the social sciences, humanities and european and international level. arts (ssh) and their inclusion in horizon europe. 2. enressh informs its members about advances, events and the association has received funding for conferences and finallly work groups of coara and regularly updates its members about also for a cost-action called enressh. the cost-action was a coara findings, outputs and communications. big success, having a broad membership and strong recognition 3. enressh provides its members the opportunity to participate among policy makers in improving evaluation procedures. after the in coara activities if they cannot represent their own organisations. life of the cost-action, the association evalhum was renamed to enressh. inform coara and its wgs on enressh findings and activities enressh’s mission according to the 4. enressh’s activities are relevant for many coara working statutes groups and coara in general. enressh will share its knowledge the purpose of the association is to encourage, promote and within coara working groups and will inform relevant coara coordinate studies and researches into the evaluation of the ssh, partners about enressh events. in all its aspects: quality representations, bibliometric studies, 5. enressh will reflect on how to generalise its findings qualitative analysis, intra and extra-academic impact, societal developed mainly for ssh disciplines to other fields of research. role, uses and effects of evaluations, etc. it particularly takes as provide feedback and give advice on coara outputs its mission to serve, at an international level, as a network of all and briefs kinds of stakeholders involved in research evaluation with a special focus on the social sciences, humanities and arts with the aim 6. enressh will provide feedback on coara outputs and policy to improve research evaluation in the social sciences, humanities briefs in its fields of specialisation. and arts and beyond. the association’s credo is to support and 7. enressh will also be ready to give advice on how to improve integrate the diversity in views and voices of all stakeholders, evaluation procedures to better reflect the diversity of research disciplines, and countries and to thus promote a pluralist approach outputs and knowledge generation processes. to research evaluation. . long-term actions past and current actions working group on ssh enressh and coara 8. enressh’s specialisation is the evaluation of ssh research. enressh’s mission since its inception in 2014 clearly is in- enressh will team up with other stakeholders, in particualr eassh, line with the coara commitments, in fact, enressh has been in a coara working group on ssh evaluation. for the ssh what coara is to be for all disciplines: on the one active participation in coara activities hand a group of persons and institutions who commit to improve 9. as enressh’s main mission is to improve evaluation procedures, evaluation practices with the goal to enhance diversity in all aspects enressh will actively participate in coara activities and will give of research. on the other it is an association that brings together input on the implementation of the principles when needed. different stakeholders to change evaluation practice on the basis of current innovations and best practices, to which enressh members continuously contribute. therefore, enerssh has taken part in coara from the first enressh stands for european network for research evaluation of the social sciences and the humanities (http://enressh.eu). it is an international association grown from the cost action ca 15137 with the same name. the cost action included almost all eu countries, plus albania, israel, mexico, moldova, norway, south africa and switzerland. this action plan was drafted by the governing board of enressh based on a discussion on the relationship between enressh and coara at the enressh ga in march 2024 and will be sent to consultation to its members and updated accordingly over time.
