coara action plan registered charity number: 1182455 version 1: november 2025 background the society of research software engineering (socrse) is a registered charity in the uk, and our mission is to establish a research environment that recognises the vital role of software in research. we work to increase software skills across everyone working in research, to promote collaboration between researchers and software experts, and to support the creation of an academic career path for research software engineers (rses). the society has approximately 700 paid members around the world and hosts an online community of over 6,500 people. we believe that the roles within research software engineering form a critical part of data driven research, innovation and scholarship. our society advocates for these interests, career pathways and how these roles contribute to research. coara is the coalition for advancing research assessment , a collective of organisations committed to reforming how research, researchers, and research organisations are evaluated. as part of this organisations are encouraged to produce an action plan to show how they are changing their practices in line with the coara commitments listed below (the first 4 of which form the ‘core’): 1. , 2. 3. , 4. 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. , society of research software engineering page 01 this document is the action plan for the society of research software engineering intended to inform our community how we are updating our practices over the next 4-5 years to align with the above commitments. socrse’s roots are in improving the recognition of those involved in contributing to research in a non-traditional sense, and has championed the formal role of the research software engineer for over a decade. it has directly supported and championed the hidden-ref project that works to raise the recognition of ‘non-traditional’ research contributions traditionally ignored in the ref assessments. by formulating a coara plan we reinforce our commitment to championing the valuable contributions made to research by software, and those working in non-traditional roles. society of research software engineering page 21 excl uded i tems we have excluded core coara commitments which involve research assessment, research assessment metrics as they are not activities that the society undertakes. we have also excluded evaluation of practices, criteria and tools as these are beyond the remit of society as we are not a governing body or learned society. however, as the activities of our membership become more visible as measurable research outputs, we need to continue to promote current approaches to appraisals and promotion criteria that are not utilising research assessment and volume metrics. commitment reason for excluding for which peer review is we do not carry out research central, supported by responsible use of assessments. quantitative indicators abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of journal- and publication-based we do not use research assessment metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of metrics. journal impact factor (jif) and h-index avoid the use of rankings of research we do not carry out research organisations in research assessment assessments. we are not a governing body, we evaluate practices, criteria and tools based therefore do not have influence over on solid evidence and the state-of-the-art in these. we encourage our membership research on research, and make data openly to engage with research on research available for evidence gathering and practices, and apply learnings to ways research of working. society of research software engineering page 03 heiman software labs page 08 acti on pl an with regards to progress towards the coara commitments, our first step is the development and publication of this action plan which outlines our commitments and plans for future progress. these are outlined below: commitment action a core part of our mission is to improve recognition for ‘non-traditional’ research contributions. some examples of this is our work collecting and promoting rsestories, supporting the hidden-ref and funding the festival of the hidden-ref. our members have developed the direct framework and we have a public knowledge base for career grades and promotions. recognise the diversity of contributions to, and we are committed to continue supporting careers in, research in accordance with the activities like those above, but also will dedicate needs and nature of the research. effort towards raising the profile of people working outside of the community. this is targeting institutions without rse roles or no centralised rse team. we will create and maintain outreach materials for introducing the role of rse in research. these will be made publicly available, making it easier for the community to conduct outreach activities. many of our activities around recognition of diversity of contributions and careers align well commit resources to reforming research here. we also have ongoing support for the assessment as is needed to achieve the software sustainability institutes’s (ssi) organisational changes committed to. international rse survey, including funding for use of the data from that survey for impact. society of research software engineering page 04 acti on pl an cont’ d commitment action socrse has recently created a policy and funding trustee role and will create a working group in order to drive organisational change at a larger scale. we create public materials on talking points, views, and lobbying positions from socrse so that senior and executive staff in the community can include these in their own discussions with continued: commit resources to reforming stakeholders. we are aware that there are some research assessment as is needed to achieve initial skills required for the wider community to the organisational changes committed to engage and we will signpost to other areas that build up these best practices. at a more granular level, we will promote materials for recognition of software in academia. for instance, citing research software, making your own software citable and publications for open source software like the journal of open source software. the new policy and funding working group aims to start shifting the expectations of stakeholders. one of these areas will be working with publishers to ensure appropriate software citation. review and develop research assessment socrse will curate a signposted list of criteria, tools and processes initiatives and tools to help support rses in order to promote their work. these will be shared on our website’s resources link library. we will also work on getting guest blog posts on citation file format files, and citing software repositories. society of research software engineering page 05 acti on pl an cont’ d commitment action we are committed to work with leaders in the rse community through our rse leaders special interest group (sig). we will introduce this action plan through workshops, having a raise awareness of research assessment dedicated session to raise awareness amongst reform and provide transparent communication, the leaders community about how they can guidance, and training on assessment criteria support this action plan. and processes as well as their use we will also highlight narrative cvs and need for recognition of fair and open practices through a workshop session for rse leaders. we have ongoing collaboration with the ssi, including alignment of our coara action plans. we will ensure that we create a standing item to exchange progress in our regular meetings. we encourage (and support) institutional rse groups to share resources with research practitioners at their institution and beyond. we will also make suggestions to regional groups on running specific sessions on areas of exchange practices and experiences to enable practice in order to share the strengths and mutual learning within and beyond the coalition learnings from one group with their local community. we will collect and publish case studies of good practice in areas such as career pathways, recognition as part of the research community, technical infrastructure management, and specialisms. society of research software engineering page 06 acti on pl an cont’ d commitment action we will use our newsletters and charity annual general meeting (agm) to put out a statement continued: exchange practices and on our progress, learnings, and ongoing plans. experiences to enable mutual learning within we hope that this will raise the awareness and beyond the coalition within our membership. we will use our newsletters and charity annual general meeting (agm) to put out a statement on our progress, learnings and ongoing plans. we hope that this will raise the awareness within our membership. there will also be a page on our website dedicated to the action communicate progress made on adherence to plan, recording workshops and noting groups the principles and implementation of the that have engaged with the action plan. commitments we will revisit the action plan on an annual basis to keep it up to date with changes in the society and/or wider environment. this will include inviting comments/feedback from the membership for the core team to consider and incorporate these. society of research software engineering page 07 versi on hi story the society of research software engineering coara action plan is produced and reviewed by a working group consisting of members of the society and trustees. this document is scheduled for review and update on annual basis. action version date working group members samantha ahern, ucl jack atkinson, institute of november publish 1.0 computing for climate science, 2025 university of cambridge stef piatek, uclh society of research software engineering page 08
