coara action plan agh university of krakow starting point the agh university of krakow is a universi- recruitment principles set forth in its institu- ty dedicated to fundamental science and tional documents and adheres to non-dis- technology research, fulfilling a social mis- criminatory recruitment standards and pro- sion of creating and transmitting knowledge cess transparency. in this regard, the agh and moral values to society. for over a cen- university has been recognised with the hr tury, the agh university has been an insti- excellence in research award. tution contributing to societal development through research and education, ensuring it is worth noting that, currently, the agh uni- the creation of technological and social in- versity staff conduct research in four fields of novations to solve the most pressing con- science: engineering and technical sciences, temporary issues. as a research university, natural sciences, humanities, and social sci- the agh university strives to ensure the high- ences. under the polish scientific evaluation est quality of scientific activities while main- system, the university is assessed in 17 sci- taining international standards of knowl- entific disciplines according to the division edge. specified by the relevant ministerial regula- tion. this division was introduced following in accordance with the agh university strat- the amendment of the “law on higher ed- egy for 2022-2026, one of the university’s ucation and science” (the act) in 2019 and primary goals is to create attractive work- is based on the oecd division of scientific ing conditions, including well-defined rules disciplines. and priorities of the hr policy, clearly de- fined scenarios for long-term career paths, due to the diverse nature of scientific re- enhanced opportunities for personal devel- search at the agh university, an individual opment within competently managed re- assessment system for researchers in var- search teams, and foster international, ac- ious scientific disciplines has already been tive work environment. in place for several years. therefore, the agh university is continuous- in general, the development of a scientif- ly working to improve recruitment proce- ic career at the university is correlated with dures and standards for evaluating staff three main areas: performance at various career stages. • scientific advancement, these efforts also strongly focus on facilitat- • development of academic skills, and ing access for groups at risk of exclusion or • a system of regular periodic employee employees returning to academic careers. evaluations. the agh university follows evaluation and 1 the system of scientific advancement is has led to the establishment of qualitative clearly connected with the regulations gov- and quantitative standards for the scientif- erning the attainment of doctoral and ha- ic achievements required to obtain degrees bilitation degrees, as well as the title of pro- and titles in various scientific disciplines. fessor, which are recognised in the polish system. this system directly results from the the agh university statute, in accordance act which outlines the relationship between with the act, assumes conducting the pro- the academic degree and the correspond- cedures for granting scientific degrees in ing university job position. simultaneously, the disciplines within the discipline coun- employment at a certain position also de- cils while retaining the right to award a de- termines the amount of funds received by gree by the agh university senate if a field of state universities from subsidies awarded science is overly broad. the agh university annually by the minister of higher education. senate has developed corresponding regu- lations specifying procedures for obtaining granting scientific degrees in poland is doctoral and habilitation degrees. it must based on an extensive evaluation of sci- be noted that in the polish system, the pro- entific achievements and contributions to cedure for obtaining the title of professor is a particular discipline and a field of study. conducted outside the university and direct- the system allows for assessing interdisci- ly by the ncse. plinary research within the same scientific field and research conducted in more than a promotion to a higher position at the agh one field of science. this is a principal factor university is possible after obtaining a high- as it enables differentiation of requirements er degree or scientific title. in the case of ap- in various disciplines and individualisation plying for a position change from assistant of assessments based on the candidate’s to assistant professor, additional require- career path. the system is based on expert ments are formulated for the candidate. for evaluation – the most crucial element being the position of university professor, the pro- reviews prepared by experts appointed to motion is possible directly after obtaining assess the candidate’s achievements. this the habilitation degree without additional approach allows for the individualisation of requirements. at the same time, the lack of a assessments based on the research area habilitation degree is not an obstacle to ap- within the discipline. in each case, the review plying for the position of a university profes- includes an evaluation of scientific achieve- sor, provided the requirements specified in ments. additionally, for the habilitation de- the university’s internal regulations are met. gree and the professor title, the review also the same applies to the case of employing includes an assessment of the candidate’s a foreign scientist if they are entitled to hold achievements and the contribution to the the position of university professor based advancement of science at different career on the regulations applicable in the country stages. the guidelines in this area have been where they developed their scientific career. defined by the national council for scientific excellence (ncse), a national statutory body in summary, the core assumptions of the whose task is to promote the development scientific advancement system introduced of the scientific workforce. in the legal regulations in poland and ap- plied at the agh university involve an ex- the principles defined in the act and the pert evaluation procedure of the candi- ncse guidelines are implemented by individ- date’s achievements, diverse evaluation ual universities, and other institutions autho- criteria for different fields and disciplines of rised to grant scientific degrees, as outlined science and are partially based on quan- in university statutes and senate resolutions. titative evaluation of scientific output, with- additionally, the experience gathered from out specifying quantitative minima. the cri- several years of evaluation based on reviews teria focus on assessing the significance of and defined guidelines for writing reviews the achievements and contributions to the coara action plan 2 agh university of cracow discipline, considering the diversity of scien- activities for the university, the faculty, and tific activities. the legal regulations also al- the university’s socio-economic environ- low for the consideration of various career ment. the organisational activities include, paths, providing, for example, the possibil- among others, holding managerial positions ity of presenting achievements in the form at the university, faculty, discipline council, of scientific publications or practical imple- or at other non-faculty organisational units mentation of innovative solutions. (non-faculty units, doctoral schools, etc.), membership in the university senate, senate the second aspect of the scientific career and rectoral committees, chairing organis- development that was mentioned is relat- ing committees of scientific, jubilee, occa- ed to periodic evaluations conducted at the sional events, or involvement in students re- agh university. cruitment committees. other organisational activities may also be included in the evalu- the periodic evaluation of the agh univer- ation at the request of the employee. sity staff is conducted among academic teachers. the periodic evaluation takes into the agh university senate gives its opinion account achievements in teaching, scien- on the principles of employee evaluation tific research, and organisational activities. along with the appropriate form templates. teaching activities include the teaching employees have the right to appeal to the load, the supervision of bachelor, engineer- rector for a review of their periodic evalu- ing, master, and doctoral theses, student ation. evaluations, and other additional teaching achievements (e.g., launching a new field as presented, the currently applicable sys- of study or implementing modern teaching tem of professional advancement and staff methods). the procedure also involves the evaluation takes into account many ele- evaluation of the teaching duties of a teach- ments influencing the overall evaluation of er and is conducted by students and doc- employee activities, aligning with the coara toral candidates using a survey system. initiative goals. as regards the scientific research activities, however, an assessment conducted within the evaluation considers publication activ- the agh university indicated areas which re- ities (scientific articles and monographs), quire changes in the future and are direct- patents, and financial outcomes of projects. ly related to the coara initiative, particularly: the evaluation of publication activities is de- • further development of the staff evalua- termined based on data from the internal in- tion system, namely improving the evalu- formation system, the database of authors ation criteria in individual categories and and publications, developed by the agh uni- introducing an ongoing monitoring sys- versity library. the library keeps track of sci- tem of the scientific achievements, entific papers and patents and provides lists • streamlining the evaluation and recruit- of points obtained by employees. the point ment mechanisms, currently dispersed allocation for all publications and patents for among numerous university units, such the evaluated period is based on the minis- as the centre for employee affairs, fac- terial regulations. the evaluation of activities ulties, etc., in terms of financial outcomes is determined based on data from the centre for project • developing unified standards for recruit- management support and the centre for ment procedures across the entire uni- cooperation and technology transfer at versity, the agh university, which provide appropri- • improving mechanisms for broad access ate lists to university authorities for assess- to the existing staff evaluation and re- ment purposes. cruitment guidelines. the last area evaluated is a staff mem- ber’s organisational activities, including all coara action plan 3 agh university of cracow implementation plan for core commitments of the coara initiative the agh university staff represent a highly preprints, or open-access publications. in skilled and competent group of research- this aspect, the role of expert evaluation ers, however they are quite diverse in terms conducted by the direct supervisor will be of scientific output and engagement in uni- enhanced. versity activities. the current staff evaluation • improving the principles of human re- system does not fully allow for the recogni- sources policy aimed at developing the tion of the best employees and sometimes university’s research and teaching poten- insufficiently motivates the development of tial, including refining the rules for: internal scientific interests and involvement in uni- competitions and promotions, approvals versity operations. for position changes or employing retired faculty members. the implementation of to optimise the university’s human resourc- standardisation of documentation relat- es policy, the foreseen actions will include: ed to hr processes and optimisation of • improving the staff evaluation system, in- cooperation and information exchange cluding the introduction of the system for procedures between central and faculty continuous monitoring of results. firstly, administration is also foreseen. a review of the procedures will be con- activities within this area will include ducted, followed by a modification of the intensifying mechanisms for communi- evaluation system to provide ongoing cating evaluation criteria to interested support in managing employees’ profes- parties, developing guidelines for facul- sional careers. the foreseen changes will ties indicating the applicable principles take into account the conclusions from a of evaluation and recruitment, including review of existing research methodolo- the use of diverse criteria for assessing gies and the metrics used at present. the academic achievements, and inform- possible modifications will particularly fo- ing candidates about the strengths and cus on the self-presentation of achieve- weaknesses of their evaluations. it is also ments in a descriptive form (e.g., port- essential to ensure that the hr process- folio), as the current evaluation system es comply with the applicable regulations primarily focuses on three areas: scientif- and standards of the european union, e.g., ic, didactic, and organisational achieve- with the hr excellence in research award. ments. this descriptive approach could • increasing the individualisation of devel- allow for the presentation of a broader opment paths and capabilities to consid- range of achievements and competen- er diverse needs of staff, ensuring equal cies beyond the standard framework. in access to these paths, and encouraging particular, it will provide the opportunity to continuous comprehensive learning in present activities from the economic and both professional competencies and cre- social aspects. ative non-professional interests. a clear emphasis will also be placed on • improving procedures for preventing dis- the equal role of the two main compo- crimination and inappropriate relations nents of the staff evaluation: scientific and in the workplace environment. enforcing teaching achievements. in addition to rules where evaluators will not discrimi- traditional indicators such as publications, nate researchers based on gender, age, the evaluation could include elements re- ethnicity, national or social origin, religion lated to, among others, teaching, social or beliefs, sexual orientation, language, engagement, interdisciplinary coopera- disability, political opinions, or social or tion, and the application of open science material status. practices, such as sharing research data, coara action plan 4 agh university of cracow • introducing advisory services on possible the university’s goal is also to provide signif- development paths for the agh univer- icant support for personal development – of sity staff and doctoral students. improv- both academic teachers and non-academ- ing employee mental health support pro- ic staff – in line with contemporary human grammes, developing a crisis assistance capital management trends. programme for employees, and dissem- inating information on available assis- tance opportunities. implementation plan for supporting commitments of the coara initiative at the agh university, the rector’s proxy and strategy. the team will consist of represen- the rector’s committee for human resourc- tatives of academic teachers from various es policy have been appointed to conduct faculties and non-academic staff respon- tasks related to personnel policy, particu- sible for analysing and preparing organ- larly recruitment, promotion criteria, eval- isational, legal, and informational docu- uation of the university professor position mentation and developing procedures and applications, periodic evaluations, and the practices. improvement of the professional qualifica- tions of academic teachers. the actions im- as the changes are implemented, the agh plemented at the agh university focus on university will launch an intensive informa- creating optimal legal and organisational tion campaign about the developed evalua- frameworks for the introduction of a mod- tion and recruitment criteria to raise employ- ern human resources policy that supports ee awareness. this activity will also include the development of the university’s priority developing and implementing effective pro- research areas. cedures for disseminating information about open positions. for this purpose, a dedicated in 2020, a new statute and work and remu- website with a compendium of knowledge neration regulations were adopted, which and best practices will be created. consider the reforms of science and high- er education introduced by the act. all doc- heads of departments, deans, and mem- uments primarily include requirements for bers of the senate’s committee for science conducting recruitment processes for uni- will play an essential role in increasing the versity employees in accordance with the scope of expert evaluation aspects. con- principles of otm-r. the statute specifies currently, in the coming years, the agh uni- the qualification criteria for positions cor- versity will actively participate in the polish responding to levels r1-r4 of the european branch of coara activities. framework for research careers and de- scribes the procedure and conditions for the efficient operation of the university also conducting competitions for positions in the requires good cooperation between the sci- academic teachers’ group. entific-teaching teams of the faculties, fac- ulty administration, and central administra- additionally, the rector plans to establish a tion. currently, procedures are often overly committee to monitor the implementation bureaucratic, and deadlines for document of the university strategy, which will oversee verification and acceptance are not al- issues related to the employee evaluation ways met, largely due to the lack of a com- and recruitment process, as well as a team prehensive electronic document circula- to monitor the implementation of the hrs4r tion system that would facilitate timely and coara action plan 5 agh university of cracow rule-compliant task execution. the agh uni- improvement of employee evaluation and versity will prepare it support for document recruitment procedures. in this aspect, the circulation and human resources manage- standardisation of documentation related ment to address these limitations. to personnel processes will be implement- ed, and the optimisation of cooperation and the university is also systematically im- information exchange procedures between plementing an efficient process manage- central and faculty administration will be ment system, which will contribute to the carried out. coara action plan 6 agh university of cracow
