earma rue joseph ii 36-38 b-1000 brussels dd.mm.yy earma statement in support of coara, the coalition for advancing research assessment earma is the european association of research managers and administrators (rmas). we represent the group of professionals that support and enable research, working closely with and supporting researchers. our members also have strategic responsibilities including planning and research culture. as such our commitment to coara is mainly in enabling, compliance, and advocacy; however, we also directly support research into research management, evaluate conference abstract proposals and bestow awards to earma members during our conference. our commitment to coara also reflects these aspects. as a signatory of coara, earma addresses the ten commitments as follows: 1. , . in addition to valuing all contributions of types of researchers, we are also advocates for the various supporting roles, focussing on research managers and administrators. we will be incorporating the contributor role taxonomy (credit) into our assessment and publication processes for example in evaluating abstract submissions in our annual conference. 2. . for our own rma awards and our annual conference contributions, we evaluate proposals through peer review informed by a few quantitative indicators. 3. , . we advocate for only using appropriate metrics to support research performance evaluation and in particular debunk metrics that do not measure what is important and those that try to imbue individual information from group averages. 4. . we do not use or advocate institutional rankings. earma@earma.org www.earma.org earma rue joseph ii 36-38 b-1000 brussels dd.mm.yy 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to research assessment is a core competence of rmas, earma itself does not need to change in this respect. 6. . our awards and their evaluation, and our conference contribution selection process, have been developed by a group of rmas with expertise in this area, an annual review is also undertaken. 7. . a subset of our trainings and annual conference includes sessions on research assessment, and a number of our members have been involved in the inorms more than our rank initiative, and the development of the metric tide report. 8. . as above this is core to earma, raising the knowledge, skills, and expertise of rmas around europe, who in turn can have a positive influence within their institutions. 9. . we are committed to improving the research and research support landscape, and communicate the ethos of coara widely among members and policy makers in europe. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the state-of-the- art in research on research, . earma is highly active in research on research management, a field related to research on research. we are also partners with the journal of research management and administration where members can submit articles for peer review and subsequent open access publication. in summary earma is fully aligned with coara and we seek to support ethical research assessment and advocate for good practice across europe in partnership with other national rma associations, and, through inorms members, around the world. earma@earma.org www.earma.org
