coara action plan 2024-2028 signed by the president 2025-04-29 coara – coalition for advancing research assessment • the coalition started 2022. there are more than 700 members in january 2025. • kth joined april 25, 2023, by a decision of the president. the decision to join was prepared by a working group led by the dean. kth:s work after the decision has continued in this working group, primarily to develop kth:s action plan. • the action plan is coordinated with coara main development and with the initiation and management of the swedish national chapter. currently 33 swedish org has signed, among these are all government research funders and many large universities. • to kth the coara principles are integral to a desired development where diverse outcomes and practices are recognized among teachers and researchers and addressed as critical to have highest impact of research. kth emphasizes the need of a qualitative judgement of research. • the coara principles can be, according to kth, divided into two groups. 1) principles 1-4 (core principles) addressing the major principles for advancing research assessment and to which kth should align and steer its development in e.g. recruitment, competence development and quality work. 2) principles 5-10 addressing the actions and collaborative efforts which should be implemented to fulfill principles 1-4. the 10 principles and commitments of coara 1-4 coara – coalition for advancing research assessment 1. recognize the diversity of contributions to, and careers in, 2. 3. , 4. avoid the use of rankings of research organizations in research assessment 3 the 10 principles and commitments of coara 5-10 coara – coalition for advancing research assessment 5. as is needed to achieve the organizational changes committed to 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. , 4 kth:s reasons for joining coara, and which effects that are expected 1. the principles within coara stand for a development that kth acknowledge in terms of how research is evaluated and how merits for researchers and teachers are assessed. • strengthened research culture at kth that recognizes and rewards quality in all its forms and supports the career development of all staff involved in research. implemented and developed quality assurance system for research 2. kth strongly advocate for a joint national development in these matters and recognize opportunities in participating from the start in a national chapter including the swedish funding landscape, ukä as the review authority, and a larger number of higher education institutions who also have signed up. • development at kth will be aligned with national and international reforms, where kth is recognized to be influential 3. in parallel, it is critical to kth to follow and participate in the european and global development of how research assessment will be designed. • established relationships, nationally and internationally, for further knowledge exchange and learning 5 additional perspectives for kth 1. in line with kth vision “we take the lead for a sustainable society” – we need a) a research culture that recognizes and rewards quality in multiple forms, b) a transparent career system inducing progress in research and teaching. 2. membership of coara demonstrates kth:s dedication to making tangible improvements to research assessment and research culture more broadly. 6 about the action plan • as a member of coara, kth agrees to communicate progress made and exchange good practice with other members of the coalition. kth also takes on a systematic approach to work with these issues – partly through the five-year action plan for reformation. • the president establish the action plan, the dean of faculty has the overall responsibility for its deployment and continuously report progress to the president and kth management team. • kth is well aligned in the timeline with the other signatories in sweden regarding the action plan. • kth is engaged in the coara national chapter sweden that was established in the fall 2024. kth is involved in four of the five working groups in the national chapter (see below). the steering committee has a regular dialogue with representatives in the working groups to agree on which aspects kth prioritizes. • we will use these working groups to further the work already under way at kth and drawing on our experiences we are well situated to contribute to their work. coara national chapter working groups, the functions at kth that primarily involved in the action plan are: (kth engagement in bold) • the dean and deputy dean of the faculty 1. research applications, individual and research • the faculty council environment support – national level • the vice president of research 2. good practice in the evaluation of researchers, doctoral • impact leaders / deputy heads of schools education and career paths: • management office, research support office, kth library, 3. responsible bibliometrics communication department, hr department 4. incentives for open science • assigned members of working groups of the swedish national 5. merit values in collaboration and utilization chapter of coara kth action plan coara (2024-2028) 2028 2027 evaluate and evolve demonstrate, 2026 follow up and implement and revise 2025 develop 2024 review and revise prepare and engage kth plan a five year development in an iterative manner. kth action plan coara (2024-2028) 2028 2027 evaluate and evolve demonstrate, 2026 follow up and revise coara cons implement and national ch 2025 develop coara consortium 2024 review and national chapter revise coara consortium prepare and national chapter engage coara consortium national chapter coara consortium national chapter kth plan a for a continuous interaction with coara members and working groups both internationally and nationally. 2024: prepare and engage focus establish a steering committee and develop an action plan at kth engage with coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate to support systemic reform, exchange good practice and monitor global progress. action/results responsible involved milestone coara has been presented in kth management team and in the dean of faculty management, faculty june 2024 faculty council council coara principles have been addressed in the investigation of kth vice dean of faculty faculty and management report october 2024 career system coara principles have been addressed in the revision of kth quality dean of faculty working group, management october-december 2024 system for research steering committee established: vice president of research, library dean of faculty administrative officers from november 2024 director, dean of faculty management office and research support office participation in national activities dean of faculty administrative officer continously research support office assignment of participants to national working groups dean of faculty from kth library, research december 2024 support office development of action plan dean of faculty coara steering committee , march 2025 kth president and kth management group 2025: review and revise focus gap analysis: kth career system and coara principles as well as kth quality system and coara principles – identify strengths and weaknesses as well as need for change clarify kth:s use of ranking system engage with coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate to support systemic reform, exchange good practice and monitor global progress action responsible involved milestone internal coara communication including introduction of coara dean of faculty coara steering group, coara march 2025, october working group, kth 2025 communication department december 2025 inform and educate faculty boards, recruitment committes and dean of faculty kth management office june 2025 promotion committe on coara principles development of kth career system kth president faculty council july 2025, december 2025 information to and education of faculty in general and recruitment dean of faculty faculty council, faculty boards december 2025 and promotion boards in specific revise kth quality system for research in relation to coara dean of faculty faculty council, faculty boards october 2025 principles clarify ranking practice and impact in relation to coara principles, vice president kth management team december 2025 further development of kth approach and use research kth management office, kth library 2025: review and revise (continued) focus gap analysis: kth career system and coara principles as well as kth quality system and coara principles – identify strengths and weaknesses as well as need for change clarify kth:s use of ranking system engage with coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate to support systemic reform, exchange good practice and monitor global progress action responsible involved milestone adopt coara principles when evaluating research activities for vice president kth library, research support continously internal funding. research office further develop strategic university intelligence kth management kth management group, faculty june 2025 office council, vice president research implement quality assurance system and quality assessments dean of faculty november 2025 2026: implement and develop focus implement reformed procedures with ongoing monitoring bibliometric indicators communicate progress made via coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate. action responsible involved milestone as is needed coara steering group management team, impact to achieve the organizational changes committed to leaders, faculty councils design follow up (business analysis, measurement, follow up) kth management research support office office library (kthb) clarify and develop the use of the bibliometric indicators vice president research support office, research impact leaders, kth library, kth management team revise coara action plan dean of faculty march 2026 2027: demonstrate, follow up and revise focus refine reformed procedures where required follow up on progress regarding implementation of coara principles further communication of principles and progress in order to strengthen faculty engagement in assessment principles and procedures of research and researchers action responsible involved milestone follow up reforms, iteration of reformed procedures to implement dean of faculty kth president, kth adjustments and give opportunity for more individuals to engage management team, coara with procedures. steering group communicate internally to staff and students and externally via dean of faculty communication department coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate. progress report to coara in fulfilment of the requirement to report dean of faculty kth president, kth after 5 years of signing. management team, coara steering group undertake actions according to outcome of follow up procedures kth president faculty council, kth management team, coara steering committee revise coara action plan dean of faculty march 2027 2028-2029: evaluate and evolve focus run formal evaluations of reformed procedures develop implementation guidelines for research assessment reform based on the outcomes of reforms achieved in this monitoring period communicate progress made via coara working groups, national chapter and/or general assembly as appropriate. action responsible involved milestone follow up on how coara's principles have been fulfilled kth president kth management team, faculty council follow up on career system dean of faculty faculty council development of the quality assurance system and quality dean of faculty faculty council assessments participation in national working groups dean of faculty assigned members of according to coara working groups national chapter participation in coara working groups and general assembly dean of faculty assigned members of according to coara working groups revise coara action plan dean of faculty march 2028 + march 2029
