action plan for the implementation commitments under the agreement on the reform of scientific research assessment 2025–2028 introduction and overview in autumn 2023, vilniaus kolegija / higher the signatories to the agreement commit to education institution (viko) was the first ap- a shared vision that the evaluation of research, plied higher education institution in lithuania researchers and research organisations should to join the coalition for advancing research recognise the diversity of outcomes, practices assessment (coara) and the agreement. this and activities that maximise the quality and agreement on research assessment reform impact of research. this requires a qualitative sets out a common direction for changes in the assessment, in which peer review is of para- assessment practices of research, researchers mount importance. and research organisations, with the ultimate the agreement and the coalition-based re- goal of improving the quality and impact of re- form movement aim to create an inclusive and search. the agreement sets out the principles, collaborative space in which to work together commitments and deadlines for reform, as towards higher quality, greater impact and a well as the principles of the coalition for organ- more effective and inclusive research system. isations wishing to cooperate in implementing it is a platform for testing and experimentation, the changes. for developing new evaluation criteria, methods 1 and tools, for joint critical reflection, for sharing (hereinafter referred to as r&d) and art at viko good practices and mutual learning, while fully will come into force in the law on science and respecting the autonomy of organisations. studies. it is stipulated that the level of research supported by the work of the coalition, organ- and experimental development at applied high- isations will decide what actions to take to im- er education institutions shall be determined by plement their commitments and at what pace conducting an expert evaluation of r&d and ar- to carry out reforms, which may vary depending tistic activities every 5 years, based on the crite- on the context (e.g. national, disciplinary or in- ria of the quality, economic and social impact, dividual researchers, research departments and and prospects of r&d and artistic activities, in research organisations or research project eval- accordance with the procedure established by uation) and the strategic goals and mission of the government or its authorised institution. each organisation. the coara coalition brings on this basis, the lithuanian research council is together members from around the world. organising a pilot expert evaluation of the r&d the coalition's main commitments are close- and artistic activities of applied higher educa- ly linked to the viko efforts to reform research tion institution in 2025, with the aim of enabling evaluation. our main principles are to increase them to test the planned procedures in practice the transparency of r&d activity and the range and thus prepare for the upcoming expert eval- of activities carried out by academic staff. uation in 2028. on 1 january 2028, a provision [30 june 2022 . no. xiv-1257, 9 p.] on the determination of the level of research and experimental development evaluation of r&d and artistic activities and its reform the applied higher education sector has under- standard, and to familiarise the public and pri- gone tremendous changes in recent years. the vate sectors and the wider community with the law on science and studies has clarified the results of these activities. purpose and mission of applied higher educa- a formal (annual) evaluation of the r&d and tion institutions, with an emphasis on r&d and artistic activities carried out by applied higher artistic activities. state funding for these activi- education institutions, has been conducted for ties and studies is being significantly increased, several years. until 2022, this evaluation was car- and applied research and practical activities are ried out by a commission set up by the ministry becoming a prerequisite for high-quality higher of education, science and sport (hereinafter re- education studies at applied higher education ferred to as šmsm). representatives of the lith- institutions. with this in mind, applied high- uanian research council (hereinafter referred to er education institutions, are strengthening as lmt) also participated in this commission. in their strategic partnerships with business and 2023, the lmt evaluated the results of the ap- the public sector, seeking to obtain r&d and plied higher education institutions r&d and ar- art commissions and carry them out to a high tistic activities for the first time. 2 by order of the director of viko no. v-112 of 4 submitted by the research and art department may 2023 "on the approval of the list of research on the specified scientific and art works shall be groups and their coordinators at viko by field of examined by the lmt in accordance with article science/arts and studies for the 2023/2024 aca- 751(1) of the law on science and studies (no. demic year", the research groups in 14 fields of xiv-654 of 18 november 2021) and order no. research and 3 fields of arts related to 27 fields v-1593 of the minister of education, science and of studies were renewed. in 2024, after merging sport of the republic of lithuania of 2 september viko and 2021 "on the implementation of paragraphs 2.2- vilnius college of technology and design, the 2.6 of resolution no. 149 of the government of number of research fields increased to 19 and the republic of lithuania of 1 march 2017 "on the number of art fields to 4. at the end of 2024, the implementation of the law on science and the faculties updated their research fields and studies of the republic of lithuania" 2.2–2.6, ap- topics as well as their research groups. the infor- proved by the description of the annual evalua- mation provided by the faculties was discussed tion of research and experimental development by the research and art department, and viko and artistic activities of applied higher educa- priority research areas, which reflect the priori- tion institutions, performs a formal evaluation ties of horizon europe and the european univer- of the scientific and artistic activities of applied sities alliance heroes, were submitted for con- higher education institutions. based on the re- sideration by the academic council in the first sults of this evaluation, applied higher education quarter of 2025. students are also included in institutions are allocated basic funding from the research groups according to the activities of the state budget for research and experimental de- research/art direction. velopment and artistic activities. researchers, taking into account the action article 51 of the law on science and studies of plan for the implementation of viko strategy for the republic of lithuania (publicity of scientific 2021–2025 (later 2026–2030), the 2022–2025 activity results) states that in order to ensure the (later 2026–2030) programme of r&d and artis- quality of research carried out with state budget tic activities, plan research in their respective re- funds, the transparency of the use of state budget search fields and, based on the results, prepare funds, increase the possibilities for the use of re- publications and presentations at scientific con- search results, and encourage scientific progress, ferences. researchers communicate with social all results of scientific research and experimen- partners in the field of research they represent, tal development carried out in scientific and emphasising that the research should be useful study institutions using state budget funds must in practice, help solve real problems, improve be published publicly using open access meth- processes or provide new insights that would be ods and means, insofar as this does not conflict useful in the professional field. with the protection of personal data, intellectual every year, no later than 1st april, the viko re- property, professional, commercial or state and search and art department submits data on r&d service secrets, national security and defense, and artistic work for the previous calendar year as well as law enforcement and public security to the lmt information system. viko is responsi- activities. the procedure for implementing open ble for the accuracy of the data submitted. data access to the results of research and experimen- on r&d and artistic activity contracts are not tal development shall be established by the lmt. examined if the amounts received are not con- from 1st january 2029 the provisions of article firmed by copies of financial transfers. the data 52(4) of the law on science and studies will come 3 into force, according to which the possibility of studies will depend on the results of the r&d and pursuing studies at a specific level is linked to the art activity assessment, but these measures will level of r&d and art at applied higher education improve the quality of studies, the level of r&d institutions, which is determined by an expert and art activity, and create conditions for a larger evaluation of r&d and art activities carried out proportion of graduates to find employment in every 5 years. all these changes will have a signif- line with their education. icant impact on the activities of applied higher education institutions. the possibility of offering key commitments and actions commitments description of the implementation of commitments period and actions 1. recognize the • viko represents 19 research and 4 art fields. at the end of 2024–2028 diversity of 2024, the faculties revised and updated the directions and contributions topics of ongoing research and research groups. to research and • the information provided by the faculties was discussed careers in research, by the department of research and arts and the viko taking into account priority research areas were formulated and approved by the needs and the academic council in 2025. nature of research. • when planning the workload of r&d and artistic activ- ities, the faculties take into account the needs of the region and social partners, as well as the expected social, economic and cultural impact. • it is planned to develop partnerships in r&d, art and pro- ject activities with lithuanian science, study and business centres, national agencies, associations, confederations, the vilnius chamber of industry, commerce and crafts, vilnius region municipal administrations, and public or- ganisations, encouraging mutual involvement and moti- vation among partners to solve problems relevant to the country and the region. • it is also planned to develop partnerships with interna- tional strategic partners in international hei and profes- sional networks and to increase the internationalisation of ongoing r&d and artistic activities. • in 2025–2026, training for researchers on the construction and evaluation of the social impact of r&d is planned. continued on the next page 4 commitments description of the implementation of commitments period and actions 2. base the evalua- • develop qualitative research evaluation criteria, improving 2025–2028 tion of scientific evaluation procedures, tools and processes accordingly. research primar- • in 2024, the forms for lecturer, department, faculty and ily on qualitative institutional activity reports were updated and supple- assessment, with mented with aspects related to the qualitative evaluation peer review as the of r&d and art. main criterion and responsible use of • in the future, it is planned to review and improve the qualitative indica- forms of these reports in order to base the evaluation tors. even more on qualitative indicators. • in 2026–2027, it is planned to organise an internal qualita- tive assessment of the r&d and artistic fields, based on a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods. • using a qualitative expert assessment methodology for research and art, an internal qualitative assessment of research and art results will be carried out in 2026–2027, according to research nd art fields. qualitative indicators will be used to assess the impact of research and art. 3. when assessing • although quantitative assessment is convenient, it does 2025–2028 academic achieve- not always reflect the quality, importance and impact of ments, scientific research results on society. research rankings • the evaluation of individual researchers will take into should not be used account the specificity and diversity of research (e.g. inter- (the indicators disciplinary research, dissemination of research results, used in these rank- etc.) and, in particular, its social impact. ings should not be used for eval- uating individual researchers). 4. allocate resources • ensure internal material resources for r&d and artistic ac- 2025–2028 for the reform of tivities by attracting orders from international and nation- research evalua- al funds, programmes, companies and other interested tion necessary for parties. the organizational • ensure internal human resources for r&d and art activi- changes commit- ties. allocate resources for the creation of research staff ted to being imple- positions. mented. continued on the next page 5 commitments description of the implementation of commitments period and actions 5. share information • participate in research evaluation reform events (research 2025–2028 about the research forum, etc.); evaluation re- • organise training, seminars and discussions for research- form and ensure ers and administrative staff, covering topics related to transparency of coara principles. communication and accessibility to guidelines and training on eval- uation criteria, processes and their use. 6. exchange practices • promoting collaboration is essential for effective change 2025–2028 and experiences in assessment processes. to enable mutual • by exchanging insights, practices and strategies with- learning within and coara groups, institutions can learn from each other . beyond the coali- this will help to create a unified system. tion. evaluate prac- tices, criteria and • active participation in coara activities and discussion tools based on reli- groups is planned, as well as informing the viko commu- able evidence and nity about the implementation of coalition agreements, the latest scientific ongoing discussions and decisions, and organising discus- research, and sions. ensure that data is • it is planned to initiate a discussion on coara topics in openly available for the european university alliance heroes. evidence gathering • it is planned to digitise the results of r&d and artistic and research. activities in the viko public repository of r&d and artistic activity results. 7. inform about the • the research evaluation action plan is published on zeno- 2025–2028 progress made do and the viko website. in following the • active participation in coara activities is planned. principles and implementing the commitments. r&d and artistic activities are increasingly recognised as essential factors in the well-being of society, and therefore the importance of research evaluation and the organisation's focus on the quality, transparency, comparability and competitiveness of r&d and artistic results is growing. 6
