coara action plan university of zurich i. organizational context external and internal policies as the largest university in switzerland with the broadest range of disciplines, the university of zurich (uzh) has been active for many years in various national and international networks concerned with developing the con- ditions in which research takes place, most importantly the swiss rectors’ conference swissuniversities1 and the league of european research universities (leru).2 since the san francisco declaration on research as- sessment (dora),3 which uzh signed in 2014, the opportunities to discuss shortcomings and possible ap- proaches in the area of research assessment (ra) in particular and in the vast field of research culture in general have multiplied. specific concerns related to open science (os) have significantly shaped the debates in recent years. further momentum comes from the expectation that research-performing institutions should guarantee equality, diversity and inclusion (edi). in addition to and inspired by these international and na- tional developments and corresponding recommendations, uzh has published two internal policies with par- ticipation of internal stakeholders: the uzh diversity policy (2018)4 and the uzh open science policy (2021).5 both policies are still an important basis for the endeavor to promote cultural change and to establish the nec- essary processes and services at uzh. ra, os, edi and research culture naturally overlap as strategic agendas and areas of reform. the present action plan, which uzh has drawn up as a signatory of the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra),6 nevertheless focuses on issues specifically relating to ra as far as possible. structural features uzh has a highly decentralized governance structure: the executive board oversees the central university ser- vices and the seven faculties,7 but the faculties have a large degree of autonomy in many respects. regulations and policies that affect the entire university are usually developed in a combination of top-down and bottom- up approaches, aiming at decisions and guidelines that are as consistent and standardized as possible and, at the same time, have the best chances to be supported and implemented in the manifold discipline-specific re- search realities and cultures. faculties then design their own standards in line with the university-wide frame- work. this is particularly evident in the recruitment and promotion of research personnel, which lies at the heart of ra for universities. 1 www.swissuniversities.ch/en/ 2 www.leru.org 3 www.sfdora.org 4 www.uzh.ch/en/explore/basics/responsibility/diversity.html 5 www.zenodo.org/records/5602816 6 www.coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-full-text/ 7 in this document, the term "faculty" (pl "faculties") refers to an organizational unit. professors are referred to as "members of the faculty"; www.uzh.ch/en/explore/faculties.html. university of zurich 1 ii. development, approach and structure of this action plan development and approach the present action plan is based on surveys and workshops with central services involved in the topic of re- search assessment (see list below), and on a comprehensive survey of representatives from all seven faculties, who were nominated as arra point of contact by their respective faculty board. in most cases, the represent- atives were the vice deans for research. in this way, a mapping was created of what is currently underway, what is planned and what the next steps are in relation to the ten commitments of the arra. the decentralized structure of uzh thus determined the process of developing this action plan and is also evi- dent in the results, i.e. in the concrete actions listed in the third part of this document. the workshops and sur- veys clearly showed that top-down regulations and initiatives would be an inadequate approach. the faculties strongly advocated that guidelines for ra should be developed from within the disciplinary cultures, whereby centrally developed policies and tools should provide orientation, support and represent at most general boundary conditions. it also became clear that there are reservations about a further policy initiative, which largely overlaps with ongoing activities and agendas (see section "external and internal policies"). accordingly, this action plan is first and foremost an overview of what central and decentralized units8 have initiated or planned so far. however, it includes some elements of future action and, in addition to sharing best practices with other universities, serves to promote mutual learning and ongoing reflection about ra within uzh. structure the primary structure of the action plan is based on the distinction between three assessment levels, which are also repeatedly referred to in the arra:9 the assessment of research projects, of individual researchers and of research performing organizations or units. the secondary structure is created by specific action fields (listed in the colored rows of the tables) that have emerged as common denominators of the many different actions that were collected in the surveys. within these action fields, measures that are ongoing are listed first, followed by those that are already planned, and finally those that are next steps to be taken. next steps refer to future actions that are considered desirable by stakeholders, but whose implementation will also require prioritization at the expense of other tasks, or additional human or financial resources. the numbers in brackets at the end of each action indicate for which of the ten commitments of the aara10 the respective action is relevant. where reference is made to central services, the abbreviations of the respective units involved are given in brackets, too (in alphabetic order): evaluation office (eo), graduate campus (grc), human resources (hr), office for equality, diversity and inclusion (edi), open science services (oss), professorships department (pd), research & grants office (r&go), strategic projects, university medicine zurich (umzh). 8 "decentralized units" refers to the faculties with their dean’s offices and their departments. "central services" refers to departments that are not assigned to a faculty, but directly to a member of the executive board of the university and whose work is aimed at the entire university. 9 see the preliminary remarks on page 2 of the full text version of the agreement: www.coara.eu/app/uploads/2022/09/2022_07_19_rra_agreement_final.pdf. 10 the ten commitments read as follows: 1: recognize the diversity of contributions to, and careers in, ; 2: for which peer review is cen- tral, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators; 3: , ; 4: avoid the use of rankings of research organizations in research assessment; 5: as is needed to achieve the organizational changes committed to; 6: ; 7: raise aware- ness of research assessment reform ; 8: ; 9: ; 10: , and make data openly available for evi- dence gathering and research; see www.coara.eu/agreement/the-commitments/. university of zurich 2 iii. action plan 1. assessment of research projects at uzh, research activities are primarily funded at the decentralized level by faculty members’ basic funds. ad- ditional research funds are allocated on a competitive basis through internal research funding programs, most of which are administered by central units. project or proposal assessment mainly takes place in the context of these programs: the evaluation process is designed and managed by central services, the reviews are carried out by faculty members or external reviewers (assigned by central services or faculty members). these pro- grams cover both individual career grants and collaborative network grants. most of the reviews in the category of individual career grants are carried out by the members of the uzh research committee.11 in addition, there are standing faculty committees as well as central and decentralized ad hoc panels. collaborative network grants are often evaluated by external reviewers. action status 1.1 consider and promote diverse types of outputs assessment frameworks for centrally funded programs, particularly in the category of col- ongoing laborative network grants, integrate a broad range of research outputs. this will be main- tained and continuously improved along with international best practice (r&go, strategic projects umzh) (1). central services (r&go, strategic projects umzh) clarify how to integrate the principles of ongoing the uzh open science policy12 into the eligibility and evaluation criteria for internal funding schemes (both in the category of individual career grants and collaborative network grants). the funding schemes are gradually being adjusted in line with these findings (1, 6). with its long-term financial and structural support for citizen science zurich (csz),13 uzh is ongoing investing in a one-stop-shop that supports researchers in carrying out high-quality citizen science projects, thus contributing to public engagement and co-creation in research (1). 1.2 promote and improve qualitative assessment and supplement it with targeted use of quantita- tive assessment central services (grc, r&go, strategic projects umzh) constantly work on improving the as- ongoing sessment templates for internal funding schemes to provide reviewers with clear manuals that list and explain the qualitative and quantitative evaluation criteria and are easy to ad- here to even under (time) pressure (2, 3). ¨ example: the new rating scales on the evaluation platform for centrally managed grants (myuzhgrants) provide detailed descriptions of the individual scores. when designing assessment procedures for internal project funding, central services (r&go) ongoing create structures for high-quality feedback to applicants, with the aim of valuing peer-review and enhancing transparency (2,7). 11 www.research.uzh.ch/en/vp/research-and-grants-office/researchcommittee.html 12 www.zenodo.org/records/5602816 13 www.citizenscience.uzh.ch/en.html university of zurich 3 central services (r&go) and decentralized units explore ways to enhance the recognition for next steps the work of the uzh research committee (2). 1.3 provide guidance and training on assessment criteria in line with the directions for the develop- ment of assessment outlined above14 information on evaluation bodies and evaluation criteria of all centrally funded programs is ongoing published online. all call documents and assessment templates (evaluation criteria, evalua- tion forms, etc.) of the centrally administered programs are made available both to grant ap- plicants and reviewers (grc, r&go) (7). current trends in research assessment are covered in courses on how to write a grant pro- ongoing posal for third-party funding for early career researchers (grc) (7). whenever possible, early career researchers actively participate in the evaluation of applica- ongoing tions for internal funding schemes and awards and thereby gain knowledge and experience in the domain of research assessment (grc, r&go) (7). ¨ examples: uzh mentoring award, uzh postdoc team award, grc career grants. with the creation of a new research synthesis center,15 uzh contributes to the foundations planned of an assessment culture that values the quality of research instead of the number of publi- cations. the center will support and train researchers in creating methodologically sound and reproducible study designs (1, 3, 7). central services (r&go) organize in-depth trainings for the members of the uzh research planned committee and for ad hoc reviewers with the aim of improving the validity of peer-review processes (7). 1.4 constantly improve our assessment procedures according to international best practice central services (grc, r&go) advance the standardization of the assessment frameworks, ongoing tools, processes and templates across the different internal funding lines (6, 10). decentralized units organize meetings and discussion on how to improve their evaluation planned practices, with support from central services, if requested (6). ¨ example: the faculty of law is considering the arra as an opportunity to review its own evaluation culture dur- ing a retreat of the faculty council in june 2025. central services (r&go) promote mutual learning among decentralized units (8). planned ¨ example: the research & grants office (r&go) organizes workshops with members of the uzh research commit- tee to harmonize evaluation procedures. central services (r&go) in collaboration with all faculties mandate data scientists (ideally next steps internal experts from the center for reproducible science, crs, or the chess) to study the strengths and weaknesses of the current assessment frameworks (central and decentral- ized) in order to design evidence-based reforms (tailored research on research (ror)) (10). 14 in action fields 1.1 and 1.2. 15 the new center will build on the existing center for reproducible science (crs); www.crs.uzh.ch/en.html. university of zurich 4 2. assessment of individual researchers at uzh, the recruitment and promotion of researchers up to and including the postdoctoral level is carried out decentrally by the pis and/or the graduate schools (in the case of doctoral candidates). on a technical level, the central human resources department (hr) is responsible for the contracts of all employees, including doctoral candidates, postdocs and academic staff, whereas the professorships department (pd) is in charge of hr mat- ters relating to professors. doctoral candidates – whether employed or not – conclude doctoral agreements with their supervisors, outlining milestones and mutual expectations, in line with centrally defined guidelines. the (research) performance of all employees and doctoral candidates up to and including postdoctoral level is assessed as part of the annual employee (performance) appraisals or career discussions. the appointment and promotion of professors is carried out by the seven faculties,16 the executive board and the board of the uni- versity, with support of the pd.17 action status 2.1 consider diverse types of outputs and career paths … … at all career levels the importance of recognizing diverse activities (incl. teaching, leadership, training, mentor- ongoing ing) is highlighted in courses on supervision for professors and postdocs as well as in courses on leadership skills for postdocs and phds, which are offered by central services (grc) (1). the recently established data stewards network, coordinated by oss, connects researchers ongoing and employees that are committed to fair and open data. the network promotes a dialogue between data stewards from various disciplines, helps them gain access to information about relevant regulations and best practices and contributes to the recognition of the work of research support staff (1, 7). the uzh mentoring award showcases good supervision of doctoral candidates at uzh. the award will continue to be presented every second year (grc) (1, 7). ongoing central services (grc) foster recognition of practices that contribute to robustness, open- ongoing ness and transparency through different courses for early career researchers in transferable skills and with events that inform directly on transparency practices (1, 7). ¨ example: grc organizes the open science summer school every two years and regularly offers a course in trans- ferable skills on good research practice. central services (grc) raise awareness on the topic of qualitative research assessment ongoing among various stakeholders (2, 7). ¨ examples: grc organizes courses on how to become appointable ("berufungstraining") that address topics re- lated to qualitative research assessment. central services (hr) include and promote the newly developed guidelines for assessing di- planned verse types of research performance in annual career discussions in addition to the revised uzh annual employee (performance) appraisal material. these guidelines are relevant for all employees except professors (1, 6). 16 www.uzh.ch/en/explore/faculties.html 17 further information on the appointment procedures at uzh can be found here: www.prof.uzh.ch/en/welcome/appointment_procedure. university of zurich 5 the implementation of uzh’s open science policy will be promoted in a new roadmap, coor- planned dinated by the central unit open science services (oss). the roadmap includes strengthen- ing the skills of uzh researchers and increasing the visibility and appreciation of open sci- ence aspects of research in assessment procedures (1, 7). 2.2 consider diverse types of outputs and career paths … … at phd level a template for doctoral agreements at uzh18 includes activities that go beyond regular re- planned search and teaching duties and covers aspects of open science and open research data. it was recently introduced, and its use will be monitored in the years to come (1, 6) (grc). central services (grc) organize an information session on the arra commitments for coor- planned dinators of doctoral programs and graduate schools (1, 9). 2.3 consider diverse types of outputs and career paths … … at postdoctoral level a working group (lead: grc) is mapping, analyzing and benchmarking different career paths ongoing that researchers at uzh take after the phd (both in and outside academia), with the aim of clarifying and harmonizing career opportunities (in terms of expectations, recognition and employment conditions) across the university (1). 2.4 consider diverse types of outputs and avoid use of inappropriate metrics … … at professorial level as part of the project hi-frame,19 central services (edi) and decentralized units have devel- ongoing oped a systematic guide on how to recognize open science practices when hiring professo- rial staff. as a basis for the broad implementation of the questionnaire, central services (oss) are initiating projects that aim at providing information on data (especially open data) and software, in addition to already available information on the proportion of open access publications (1, 6). ¨ example: development of a current research information system (cris). uzh has adopted "guidelines on selection procedures in professorial appointments"20 in next steps 2018 which recognize uzh's commitment to dora. this is supplemented by guidelines on appointment and promotion procedures developed and implemented by the individual fac- ulties. the existing guidelines will be reviewed with regard to the arra and amended if nec- essary (pd) (1, 2, 3). decentralized units develop discipline-specific answers to the question in which cases the next steps use of publication metrics is appropriate and explore possible alternatives for those cases in which quantitative metrics are inappropriate. the uzh-internal working group open 18 www.graduates.uzh.ch/en/dokumente.html 19 www.openscience.uzh.ch/en/open-science-at-uzh/p5-open-science-projects/projects-2021-2024/hi-frame.html 20 www.prof.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:a5146bcc-847a-4b83-8213-137115ea62ff/guidelines_selection_procedures.pdf university of zurich 6 science led by oss and with representatives of all seven faculties will be a suitable forum to kickstart this discussion (2, 3, 4). 3. assessment of research performing organizations/units in 2000, the university of zurich established its evaluation office. it is tasked with evaluating all of uzh's ap- proximately 200 organizational units at intervals of six to eight years. the purpose of the evaluations is, among others, to survey and further develop the quality of academic work. the evaluations are executed in a multi- stage procedure, including self- and external evaluation. with its center for higher education and science stud- ies (chess),21 uzh conducts internationally recognized research in the field of higher education and science studies and thereby pools relevant expertise for a high-quality self-reflection of the institution. action status 3.1 promote qualitative assessment methods and avoid the inappropriate use of metrics the evaluation office uses only field-normalized, publication-related indicators (esi-fields). ongoing since 2023, bibliometric analyses are minimized and information on open access (oa) is in- cluded in the report of evaluated units (3). ¨ after every evaluation, the external experts get asked for feedback on the process. subjective evaluation of publi- cations is carried out in the self-evaluation report, highlighting the most important publications from the per- spective of the units. detailed bibliometric analyses are only performed for units where it is appropriate or mostly appropriate; otherwise, a lighter bibliometric approach is used, covering the number of publications, languages, proportion of open access, and journals in which publications most frequently appear. all key steps during an evaluation process are carried out through discussions: preliminary ongoing talks, evaluation agreement discussions, talks between the evaluated parties and experts, strategy and development discussions (agreement on measures and monitoring) and through written reports (self-evaluation and expert reports) (7). the evaluation office increases the level of qualitative methods in its processes (7). ongoing ¨ the template for the self-evaluation report will be adapted: the research section will focus even more on quality (instead of "5 most important publications", researchers are asked for "most important research output" (publi- cations, data collection, software, etc.) and to justify their choice in a few sentences). ¨ in addition to surveys done prior to the expert assessment, as a substitute for written surveys, focus group dis- cussions with predefined topics will be part of the process. 3.2 avoid the use of rankings in 2024, uzh decided to withdraw from the times higher education world university rank- ongoing ing (the ranking), arguing that the ranking is unable to reflect the wide range of teaching and research activities undertaken by universities. the evaluation office still supplies data for other rankings but also provides background information on the rankings and explains the problematic sides of the ranking results to internal and external interested parties. uzh has decided to join the european higher education sector observatory (eheso),22 a data and information platform on the higher education sector in europe. by consolidating 21 www.chess.uzh.ch/en.html 22 https://national-policies.eacea.ec.europa.eu/eheso university of zurich 7 and integrating various openly available data sources, the observatory provides a transpar- ent view of european higher education systems, institutional profiles and indicators. it fol- lows the u-multirank and enables the comparison, analysis, and showcasing of the sector's performance based on multidimensional standards (4). uzh has decided not to allow organizational or strategic decisions to be influenced by rank- ongoing ing considerations (4). ¨ rankings are not considered in the evaluation processes carried out by the evaluation office. with the support of the central services (eo), faculties and departments develop a position next steps in which cases the use of rankings is appropriate in their domains and in which cases deci- sions should not be based on rankings, and develop strategies to enforce this distinction in practice (4). 3.3 constantly improve the quality of assessment procedures, according to international best practice the chess continues to establish its advisory services for central services. the leadership ongoing and governance academy (lga) provides leadership training offers. the lga plays a crucial role in the development of uzh's leadership culture (5). the evaluation office reviews its processes regularly and adjusts them where appropriate ongoing (6). ¨ example: after every evaluation, the external experts are asked for feedback on the process in a questionnaire. the evaluation office regularly consults a data scientist to consistently improve its proce- ongoing dures and tools (10). 4 general actions on all assessment levels some action lines concern several or all of the three assessment levels (assessment of research projects, of individual researchers and of research performing organizations). these are listed below. action status central services regularly exchange on best practices with peers at national and interna- ongoing tional level (8). ¨ at national level: swiss national science foundation (snsf); correspondent central services at other swiss uni- versities; qualitätsnetzwerk der universitären hochschulen der schweiz (q-netzwerk); coara-related bodies. ¨ at international level: other member universities within league of european research universities (leru), u21 and the european university alliance una europa, strategic alliance between berlin, vienna and zurich. central services (r&go) incorporate findings from record23 into assessment frameworks, planned tools and processes wherever possible (1). central services (r&go, grc, hr, pd) and faculties develop and implement a common cv next steps template which considers diverse types of outputs, achievements and roles, based on the 23 record was a project supported by the federal program p5 open science (seri, swissuniversities), running for one year (2024). it aimed at a national commitment on how open research data (ord) should be recognized in research assessment (assessment of projects, individuals, institutions/units); www.forscenter.ch/projects/swissuniversities-record/. university of zurich 8 experiences and findings of national and international research performing institutions and funding agencies with narrative cv formats (1, 6, 8, 2). central services (grc, pd, r&go) and decentralized units design and implement further next steps training possibilities, starting at the postdoctoral level, on how to perform research assess- ment (peer review procedures and evaluation of individuals for promotion) (1). central services (grc) offer courses for early career researchers on how to write a narrative next steps cv (7). university of zurich, 2025 this action plan is licensed under cc-by 4.0 international license. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15703600 authors research & grants office (r&go), university of zurich (uzh) luzia budmiger, lisa müller contributors the following units of the university were significantly involved in the creation of this action plan, by providing input during the elabora- tion process or by giving feedback on previous drafts: evaluation office (eo), graduate campus (grc), human resources (hr), office for equality, diversity and inclusion (edi), open science services (oss), professorships department (pd), research & grants office (r&go), strategic projects, university medicine zurich (umzh), along with representatives of all seven uzh faculties (www.uzh.ch/en/explore/faculties.html). proofreading karin dörig (r&go) contact university of zurich research & grants office support@research.uzh.ch www.research.uzh.ch/en.html university of zurich 9
