coara url action plan 2025-2028 approved by the governing board on june 12, 2025. https://www.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17120257 coara url action plan 2025-2028 table of contents 1. starting situation ...................................................................................................... 3 1.1. background ....................................................................................................... 3 1.2. the evaluation of research and teaching staff at the ramon llull university ..... 4 2. action plan 2025-2028 ............................................................................................. 4 2.1. premises for the construction of the plan .......................................................... 4 2.2. proposed action plan ........................................................................................ 5 2.3. governance and monitoring .............................................................................. 8 2 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 1. starting situation ramon llull university (url) is a private, non-profit university of a federal nature, which has been part of the international coalition for the advancement of research evaluation (coara) since its constitution in december 2022. this adhesion is part of the university's broader commitment to promote more equitable, qualitative and continuous improvement-oriented assessment, in line with the principles of responsible research and innovation of the university's strategic framework. at the same time, the url is a signatory of the declaration on research assessment (dora), which claims the need to value research beyond bibliometric metrics, and also of the barcelona declaration on open research information, which emphasizes the social commitment of research and the promotion of open and inclusive research. among the commitments adopted with the accession to coara is the elaboration of a 4-year institutional action plan that responds to the agreement on reforming research assessment signed. this plan aims to avoid the misuse of quantitative measures that can favour malpractices and thus promote a culture of evaluation based on academic integrity, transparency and accountability. this document includes the coara action plan of the ramon llull university for the period 2025-2028, approved by the governing board on june 12, 2025. 1.1. background the international coalition for the advancement of research assessment (coara) emerged in 2022 as a global initiative, based on the agreement on reforming research assessment and signed at the time of writing this plan by more than 800 organizations around the world. this international coalition, which brings together universities, research agencies and other entities, works to develop and promote a fairer, more transparent scientific evaluation model based on the actual quality of contributions, abandoning the reliance on quantitative indicators that often do not reflect the full richness of research. in accordance with these principles, coara identifies ten key points ranging from the protection of scientific integrity and excellence to the recognition of disciplinary diversity, social impact and the need for collaboration and transparency in evaluation processes. during the first year of activity, coara is organized into groups that address specific topics (e.g., academic career, infrastructure, multilingualism, responsible metrics, etc.), and also into national chapters. in the case of spain, the spanish chapter was created, led by the national agency for quality assessment and accreditation (aneca), the conference of rectors of spanish universities (crue) and the spanish national research council (csic), with the support of the ministry of universities, first, and the ministry of science, innovation and universities. later. at the state level, during 2023 the contributions and regulatory modifications regarding academic evaluation are noteworthy. on the one hand, the new organic law of the university system (losu) incorporates modifications in the accreditation of teaching staff and specific criteria regarding the promotion of open science that must be incorporated into the evaluation by quality agencies. on the other hand, the first national 3 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 open science strategy (enca) 2023-2027 contemplates, as one of the strategic objectives, the establishment of new research evaluation mechanisms and a system of incentives and recognitions that should promote open science practices. in order to incorporate these regulatory changes, aneca constitutes the evaluation and monitoring commission of the state accreditation procedure and thus be able to comply with the commitments made with dora and coara. 1.2. the evaluation of research and teaching staff at the ramon llull university currently, the evaluation of research and teaching staff at the url is based on quantitative and qualitative criteria. however, the diversity of institutions and centers resulting from the federal nature of the university represents a challenge to harmonize these criteria. in addition, the url is a generalist university that integrates a wide range of fields of knowledge, from the social sciences and humanities to engineering, health sciences and the arts, each with its own scientific traditions, knowledge production models and quality standards. this richness and diversity of disciplines also pose a challenge when it comes to harmonizing research evaluation processes, since it is necessary to ensure that the criteria applied in each field are relevant and recognize the particularities of each area. this action plan seeks to establish common principles, respecting the uniqueness of each of the centres and the disciplinary diversity of the university. 2. action plan 2025-2028 2.1. premises for the construction of the plan the url action plan for the achievement of coara commitments has been designed based on the following premises: • commitment to coara: all actions of the plan always include the four commitments that represent the core of the reform proposal and that are translated as: 1. recognize the variety of research contributions. 2. prioritize qualitative evaluations, making responsible use of quantitative indicators where appropriate. 3. abandon the inappropriate use of metrics such as the journal impact factor or the h-index. 4. avoid making use of ranking data in the evaluation of research. • progressive application: progressively incorporate the regulatory changes introduced by the losu, with an overall view. • internal participation: involve the different groups of the url community affected by this plan, in the entire process of design, execution and monitoring. • benchmarking: to participate in relevant national and international forums that allow us to compare ourselves with similar and related institutions, and to collect the derived good practices. • evaluation and continuous improvement: carry out pilot actions and review the plan periodically, making use of good national and international practices. 4 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 2.2. proposed action plan the priority actions of the url action plan 2025-2028 are summarized in the following table: description / key follow-up coara's commitments objectives actions responsible calendar tasks evidence 5. commit resources to the to monitor the actions of reform of research minutes of the the plan and to report in a vice-rector for evaluation, which is coordinate the actions 0. annual meetings of the timely manner to the research and 2025-2028 necessary to achieve the of the plan. follow-up governing bodies of university's governing innovation organizational changes that the url. bodies. have been assumed. to have a space to reflect on the categories establish a schedule of 2025 no. of meetings held. of teaching staff and the regular meetings. evaluation criteria. analyse the existing harmonize categories new regulations on categories and their access 2025-2026 and access routes. access to categories. procedure. vice-rector for 1. creation of propose incorporating 6, review and develop research and the internal indicators of social impact, document with new criteria, tools and processes innovation, rector's 2025-2026 faculty working interdisciplinarity and proposal of categories. for research evaluation. delegate for faculty group teaching quality. affairs promote more inclusive and equitable criteria in make it easier to use the evaluation of altmetric in the url metrics tracking report 2025-2028 teachers. community to drive new (altmetric). metrics. propose modifications to new articles internal regulations, in 2025-2026 incorporated into the accordance with coara. regulations. 5 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 description / key follow-up coara's commitments objectives actions responsible calendar tasks evidence develop an open science approval of the 2025-2026 to promote the url policy. regulations. principles of open science in relation to research results. 2. creation of incorporate monitoring indicators into relevant head of the office 2025-2028 the open reports. of research and science report on the evolution innovation working group of open science facilitate and promote the principles to research track the use of tools to use of daus, the dmp tool, results. promote open url 2025-2028 and the cora data science. repository. rdr. 3. update reform the criteria for review and update the internal calls vice-rector for calls for the selection bases of calls to include no. of reformulated adapted to research and 2025-2028 and evaluation of qualitative and responsible calls. coara innovation personnel and projects. criteria. principles write clear guidelines on 7. raise awareness of no. of training evaluation criteria and good research evaluation reform ensure the sessions carried out. 4. practices. and provide transparent dissemination and head of the office communication communication, guidance, effective adoption of the of research and 2025 2027 and training and training on evaluation new evaluation criteria innovation strategy organize annual training criteria and processes, and and processes. % of participation (pdi sessions for pdi and on the use to be made. and ptgas). ptgas. 8. to exchange practices and 5. participation stay in touch with the vice-rector for experiences that allow in the coara participation in the coara annual summary of coalition, its progress research and 2025-2028 mutual learning inside and general general assembly. participation in coara. and new developments. innovation outside coara. assembly 6 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 description / key follow-up coara's commitments objectives actions responsible calendar tasks evidence attend meetings and no. contribute to the workshops of the spanish meetings/workshops national discussion. chapter led by aneca. attended. 9. communicate progress and adherence to the 6. participation share experiences and vice-rector for principles and in the spanish documentation with other research and 2025-2028 implementation of chapter of universities. innovation commitments. benefit from shared coara concrete proposals good practices. applied to the url. adapt the recommendations received 10. evaluate practices, to the reality of the url. criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the most current research on research 7. follow-up of evaluation, with open data to run pilot evaluation success stories vice-rector for collect evidence and tests that serve as a follow-up of pilot tests no. of actions or evaluation research and 2025-2028 generate new research. basis for testing and within the url. implemented. proposals that innovation analysis. are innovative 7 from 8 coara url action plan 2025-2028 2.3. governance and monitoring • responsibility: the vice-rector for research and innovation will coordinate the plan, with the support of the working group-faculty and the head of the research and innovation office of the url. • monitoring: annual reports will be presented to the governing team and the university's governing bodies. • evaluation: a six-monthly review of the actions implemented will be carried out and the plan will be adjusted according to the needs detected. 8 from 8
