research & development coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) – action plan table of contents preliminary considerations 3 1 sustainable promotion of careers 4 1.1 introduction of the category of -assistance professorship 4 1.2 project development of the doctoral -phase 4 2 nurture a culture of collaboration 5 2.1 open research data 5 2.2 quality management 6 2.3 a comprehensive notion of the research activity 7 the matrix 7 the indicator system 7 closing remarks 8 zurich university of teacher education, lagerstrasse 2, 8090 zurich, phzh.ch 2 action plan ph zurich preliminary considerations zurich university of teacher education (pädagogische hoch- the office of the vice rector for research and development schule zürich, ph zurich henceforth) is a public institution of is incorporating the concerns of the coara agreement into the canton of zurich, accredited as university in 2021. it is the ongoing projects and plans. this goes hand in hand with the largest university of teacher education in switzerland. the le- commitee on quality management’s efforts to focus on the gal framework at cantonal level is provided by the universi- implementation of its quality principles. the committee on ties of applied sciences act and the university regulations. quality management is a permanent body mandated by the ph zurich is responsible for training teachers and other pro- executive board. fesionals in the field of education. in this function, it promotes innovative research in the fields of teaching and learning, ed- ucation and training, the education system and the profes- sion, and disseminates its results widely. ph zurich consists of three vice rectorates, the vice rector- ate for teacher education, the vice rectorate for continuing education and services and the vice rectorate for research and development. although the institutional research pro- ject management is part of the portfolio of the vice rector- ate for research and development, de facto research pro- jects can and are initiated in all three vice rectorates. ph zurich became a member of coara in june 2023 and, in consultation with the executive board of the university, has committed itself to the principles of the coara agreement. the five goals of ph zurich for the current strategy period (2022–2025) illustrate the institution’s identification with the objectives and principles covered by the coara commit- ments.1 particularly in the context of goal 4 (facilitating pro- fessional development) and goal 5 (developing a culture of collaboration, anchoring leadership), ph zurich has, in the last two years, given new impetus to its projects for the sus- tainable promotion of careers in the context of research on teacher education, while at the same time further developing its core understanding of quality (discursive, cooperative) and research transfer with a recently introduced institutional pol- icy on open research data. 1 a new strategic planning process began in spring 2025. the current strategic period has been extended to 2026, after which a new period will begin in 2027 and run until 2029. zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 3 1 sustainable promotion of careers the institution has most recently focused on two different de- an assistant professorship may lead to a professorship. the velopment projects with regard to the promotion of careers: qualifications required for a subsequent appointment vary the introduction of a new type of assistant professorship and according to the subject and disciplinary context as well as the launch of a major project to develop the doctoral phase. the individual starting position. the existing profile and previ- the project to develop the doctoral phase is still in progress. ous career of the assistant professor will be taken into ac- count when defining the qualification targets. individual the office of the vice rector for research and development qualification requirements and central performance criteria started the implementation of both projects under the fol- are expressed in a binding qualification agreement. lowing strategic guiding principles: assistant professorships are subject to interim and final eval- – to create career prospects and promote a diverse staff uations. these evaluations are based on a performance port- composition folio compiled by the assistant professor, which is assessed – to further develop career opportunities in the field of on the one hand in relation to the individual binding qualifica- teacher education research tion agreement, and on the other hand in relation to the guid- – to take into account different levels of qualifications and ing criterion of employability beyond ph zurich. professional and personal backgrounds – to optimise the assessment of outputs and contributions in the event of a positive development, the tenure committee conducive to the next career step has the function of appointing an assistant professor to a reg- ular professorship without a further competitive procedure. in particular, commitment 1 of the agreement on reforming for this reason, there is continuity in terms of personnel in the research assessment: «recognise the diversity of contribu- tenure committee with the original selection committee. tions to and careers in research, in accordance with the needs and nature of research», resonates with the measures and projects underway in the institution to address a broad and 1.2 project development of diverse research community. these include structural chang- the doctoral -phase es (such as a new category of staff), but other processes which transcend the institution, such as the qualification of ph zurich considers the doctoral phase as an essential phase doctoral researchers in schools of education. from the institutional and individual point of view and as- sumes its institutional responsibility (together with other uni- versities) in the discussion around the independent right to 1.1 introduction of the category of award doctorates for this specific type of university of teach- -assistance professorship er education. the project to develop the doctoral phase cov- ers therefore various activities to be conceptualised until the the introduction of this new category of staff is the result of end of 2025 and implemented successively thereafter: a process in which the community considered both the diver- sity of biographies of current and potential researchers and – the institutionalisation and coordination of activities to the specificities of career development in the field of teacher promote the doctorate education. they have therefore developed a new category of – the creation of framework conditions for doctoral students staff that reflects these considerations. – the optimisation of the assessment conditions for the promotion and support of doctoral students and the es- the portfolio of responsibilities of assistant professors is de- tablishment of a coherent structure of offers signed to cover all areas (research and development, teach- – the further development of a proper «academic qualifica- ing, continuing education, service and consultancy, participa- tion culture» tion in expert groups, and administrative work) and must – the strengthening of the doctorate as an opportunity for include research and teaching as core tasks. internal personnel development and career promotion – the increasing of the visibility of the university teacher ed- candidates for a vacant assistant professorship at ph zurich ucation type in the qualification of early-stage academics will typically be younger than 50 years of age, although the potential for development of their institutional effectiveness milestone year 2028: development and improvement of the in the field in question should be rated proportionally higher general framework conditions for the doctoral phase. struc- than biological age. ture and implementation of the cooperative doctoral program ‹educational research in the professional field› (bib) and of ‹reconstructive professionalization research› (pro2). zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 4 2 nurture a culture of collaboration the staff of ph zurich cultivate an open, discursive, and vi- pgb project b5.2 «implementation of open research data at brant university culture. they work in partnership on inter- ph zurich». the project aims to further clarify disciplinary, le- and transdisciplinary matters and take into account the prin- gal, and information technology requirements for the public ciples of ph zurich’s quality culture, which is ensured in provision of data. the ongoing project wants to assess in an particular by diverse forms of participation by all university open debate with researchers at ph zurich existing and po- members, university-wide specialist groups, overarching tential practices in light of their legal and technical possibili- events and projects, and academic and social events on cam- ties and challenges. pus. the design of the workspaces and the digital infrastruc- ture also enable and promote flexible collaboration. in doing so, ph zurich aligns itself with the supporting com- mitments of coara’s agreement, in particular with the com- the collaboration and interdisciplinary culture is an impor- mitment 5: «commit resources to reforming research assess- tant pillar that paves the ground for the emergence of di- ment as it is needed to achieve the organisational changes verse research practices. other values that ph zurich pursues committed to. (this includes resources to support the neces- and has institutionalised or is in the process of institutionalis- sary infrastructure such as tools and services for the trans- ing are opennes and transparency. parent collection and processing of data on research assess- ment practices».) 2.1 open research data the overarching objective of the project is a consensual framework for the implementation of open research data. open science at ph zurich follows the basic principles of open- this objective can be described as threefold: ness, transparency, and reusability (see unesco recommen- dation of open science: unesco recommendation on open – a clarification of the central legal, disciplinary and archival science | unesco) in all phases of education and research. issues in dealing with the research data and metadata ph zurich is since 2018 a supporter of the ‹berlin declaration and its publication on open access to knowledge in the sciences and humanities› – a definition of the best practices for research data man- (berlin declaration). through free access to scientific publica- agement on this basis, and an integration into existing tions (open access) and the shared use of research data project management processes. (open research data) and teaching materials (open educa- – a comprehensive support services in the fields of research tional resources), open science aims to make knowledge ac- data management and open research data with the goal, cessible within and outside the scientific community. open in the longer run, of contributing to improving data litera- science is therefore part of contemporary research practice. cy among members of the research university community. at ph zurich, open science is actively promoted, implement- ed, and continuously developed through a combination of various measures focusing on ord will be developed and im- services, instruments, and measures. as part of open access plemented over a time horizon of two years and beyond. (the at ph zurich, the library is actively involved in the implemen- action plan of ph zurich for the pgb project can be found tation of the national open access strategy. the most impor- here (document in german). tant instruments include the ph zurich repository and the institutional open access fund (ioaf). in close cooperation in may 2024, the open science portal was launched at the ph with the vice rectorates, the library is continuously working zurich in a dedicated sharepoint workspace accessible to the to expand the oa infrastructure and the service portfolio to ph zurich academic community and set up specifically for match the needs of lecturers and academic staff. this purpose. researchers can find content and information on open access, open research data and research data man- in addition to open access, which focuses primarily on access agement in one place. to scientific publications, open research data (ord) is an- other important field of open science. by participating in the a further milestone in the progress of the project «implemen- swissuniversities pgb b5.2 data stewardship programme, tation of open research data at ph zurich» has been the ph zurich is taking part in the swiss national strategy open recent approval through the executive board of an institu- research data programme. for the ph zurich, participation tional open research data policy (may 2024). in order to in this ord programme means the integration of further meet the discipline-specific needs and challenges and to steps towards open science. strengthen the sustainable and transparent dissemination of knowledge, the ord policy of ph zurich shows various rec- at the beginning of march 2023, the ph zurich launched the zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 5 ommendations in which research data can be published as under principle 1, several institutionalised discussion groups ord. the ord policy is intended to highlight the central and participatory instruments and activities ensure a differ- guidelines and further information on ord topics will be de- entiated understanding of quality. the research programmes, veloped and made available in the form of guidelines for re- in which the research units set out their intended research searchers on the open science portal (as planned as a fur- agenda for the next four years, are an instrument that serves ther measure of the pgb project b5.2 data stewardship). several purposes at once. ph zurich has developed, in cooperation with other universi- – orientation: they provide information on the content and ties, a series of modules on ord and on research data man- thematic orientation and disciplinary references of the re- agement topics, which they offer once every semester. work search units. is underway on both an information sheet on data manage- – planning: they show which topics the units intend to work ment and an internal data management plan. on, or which objectives will be pursued with which resourc- es over a four-year period. although quantifiable objec- milestone year 2028: at the institutional level, the establish- tives are not necessarily excluded, the focus is on how a ment of the ord policy, the development of practical tools, research unit can develop its preferred scientific and pro- and the regular implementation and communication of open fessional themes in qualitative terms. research, which are practices key to fostering sustainable – communication: they support the exchange of informa- awareness and enabling a long-term cultural shift by 2028. tion within the research unit, the vice rectorate and ph zurich. – coordination: they support the researchers within a re- 2.2 quality management search unit in coordinating their r&d topics and activities. – quality development: the research programme has both ph zurich signed the declaration on research assessment in an evaluative and a forward-looking formative character. may 2019 and cultivates an understanding of quality that is the research programmes support the research unit in as- consistent with the principles of the san francisco declaration sessing the extent to which the developments and objec- on research assessment, dora, and the commitments of tives have been achieved over the last four years and what coara. the office of the vice rector for research and devel- further developments should be aimed for. opment propagates a definition of quality that goes far beyond quality development does not only take place at the level of measurement approaches and attaches central importance to the research units. at management level, quality standards discursive, participatory, and dynamic notions of quality. are set according to the principles described above. the cur- rent four-year strategic period is coming to an end. towards particularly the commitment 2 of the coara agreement the end of the four-year strategic period, the vice rector for resonates through our «quality management research and research and development will prepare a short self-assess- development» concept: «base research assessment primarily ment report on the state of development. on qualitative evaluation for which peer review is central, sup- ported by responsible use of quantitative indicators». this self-assessment report will be critically discussed by the members of the vice rectorate and adjusted by the vice-rec- the «quality management research and development» con- tors’s board on the basis of the discussion. this internal view cept was developed in accordance with ph zurich’s general of the developments will be complemented by a critical exter- quality framework for the current strategic period, which nal perspective of the research advisory board, whose tasks was meant to end in 2025 and has been extended to 2026 include supporting quality development and assurance. fur- following the recent appointment of our new president. it ther external and collegial criticism of individual quality-rele- adapts the quality principles of the general framework and vant aspects takes place via the annual institutional peer identifies measures, activities and tools within the quality feedback with the universities of teacher education in bern, management system. lucerne, and st. gallen. within the framework of this, peer the quality culture of ph zurich is the result of four principles: feedback quality officers for r&d at the aforementioned uni- versities of teacher education meet to discuss various topics principle 1: a combination of individual and shared responsi- relevant to the quality of r&d. the aim is to use the discus- bility for quality sions on the further development of quality in r&d at the in- principle 2: an open discourse on quality issues dividual universities of teacher education. principle 3: the multiple perspectives of stakeholder groups principle 4: the preservation of the greatest possible freedom milestone 2028: renewal of the institutional accreditation ac- for innovation cording to the standards set by the swiss accreditation coun- principle 5: a dialogue with recurring quality control mecha- cil. nisms (feedback loops) zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 6 2.3 a comprehensive notion of the research it is an organised set of management-relevant indicators activity that are interrelated. there are, broadly speaking, two types of indicator systems. the matrix calculation systems relate indicators to each other mathe- the matrix: «what research does»2 attempts to capture the matically. classification systems assign indicators to specific complexity of the research activity, by systemically classify- topics or areas of an organisation and use their structure to ing all related, central, and subsidiary activities and achieve- clarify important dependencies and relationships. the indica- ments, with regard to four main core tasks and four spheres tor system of the ph zurich is a classification system. quan- of influence. titative and qualitative indicators are part of it. the four main core tasks are: the indicator system satisfies the specific information needs – generating new scientific knowledge of institutional and external stakeholdes and is used to eval- – communicating and transferring generated knowledge uate the effect of all ph zurich activities, independently of – establishing and maintaining knowledge exchange struc- the addressee or the agent. tures – promoting early careers the performance indicators are organised according to vari- ous criteria, one of them being the indicator group, a common and the spheres of influence: impact model based on the classic new public management – the scientific community model. a distinction is made between five phases: – the institutional community – context – the school and education system – input, the quantity and the quality of the available re- – the general public sources – process, with a focus on efficiency the matrix is the result of a discursive process with participa- – output, the quantity and the quality of the immediate re- tion of those being assessed and an inbuilt external validation sults through stakeholders and groups of interest. it is an institu- – effect and long-run impact tional framework meant to guarantee the quality assurance and continuous development of ph zurich research output the indicator system is used across the institution, not only in and processes, that may be used by researchers and other the research and development resort. across the board the assessed actors to reflect their own position. system is conceived in a multidimensional way. for the activ- ities in research and development, this has the consequence the matrix resonates with coara’s step 5 of the reform that not only are the activities evaluated, as output or prod- journey («develop existing and design new assessment crite- uct, but the context in which the activities emerge, the foun- ria, tools and processes with the assessors and those who are dations on which they rely, and the anchoring and transfer of assessed to include diverse practices, outputs, activities and r&d findings are also the object of the indicator system. actors»). the indicator system is systematically reviewed every four the indicator system years, and adjusted where necessary, together with the other the so-called indicator system emerged out of a project quality management tools. the last review took place in au- which started in the year 2019 and has received a new im- tumn 2024. pulse through a new overarching project, which aims at devel- oping an information management tool for reporting purpos- es in project and publications management. the indicator system constitutes, together with the process and project management, an overarching quality manage- ment element. the system helps managers to achieve the university’s goals and to base their decisions on an objective basis. 2 this matrix was presented as a systematic to reflect the diversity of academic achievements linked to the research, with the goal of contributing towards an institutional discursive understanding of research. see sarah tresch und peter tremp, «‹was forschung leistet›: diskursive verständigung und vergewisserung dank ordnender systematik», forschung (fo), 2018, 1, pages 23–27. zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 7 closing remarks ph zurich has demonstrated its commitment to the princi- it is at this crossroad between scientific discourse and school ples of the coara agreement by implementing several con- reality that ph zurich shapes its identity. crete projects over the past two years of the current strate- gic period, as well as continuously developing its quality ph zurich is committed to continuing its active participation management system. two development projects focusing on in coara membership activities, particularly in the context career assessment and development have already resulted in of teacher education universities, and to fostering the ex- structural adaptations, such as the introduction of a catego- change of information on hurdles and best practices in re- ry of assistant professorship. the institution considers the search assessment. development of the doctoral phase (in accordance with the coara principles) to be a key project, not only for ph zurich, but for universities of teacher education as a whole. the pro- ject will continue into the next strategic period. the process of implementing an institutional culture of open research data is underway and has reached several impor- tant milestones recently, such as the approval of an open re- search data policy. further information on ord is being de- veloped in the form of guidelines for researchers. in parallel, our open science portal is becoming better known by mem- bers of our community. these processes emerge from an in- stitutional understanding of quality and quality manage- ment, which takes place at different levels: at the level of the research units and at management level. this understanding conceives of performance as a process that evolves and un- folds over five phases and through various spheres of influ- ence. the next two years will bring about the end of the current strategic period and the beginning of a new one. the new strategic period and the institutional reaccreditation pro- cess, due to finish in 2028, are further milestones in the devel- opment of our quality management system while the basic understanding of the concept of quality and evaluation of our research remains constant, certain tools or concepts will get revisited and reformulated. all the develop- ments to date rely on a broad consensus about the interde- pendence and mutual fertilisation of the activities of the uni- versity of teacher education across its divisions and its members. providing all members of the community with opportunities for professional development implies further articulating and concretising the cooperation across the three vice-rectorates of teacher education, further education and service and re- search, since research activities take place not only in the vice-rectorate for research and development, but across the whole institution. zurich university of teacher education, phzh.ch 8
