coara action plan 2024-2027 university of cagliari - unica 1. introduction, research strategy and commitments about the university of cagliari the university of cagliari (unica)1 is a research university, the largest he institution in sardinia, italy. as a public institution, given its geographic location, unica fulfills its societal responsibility through teaching, research and valorization/exploitation of research results, with a comprehensive multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approach offer- ing complete education and research training on stem, biomedical and humanities fields. 1. introduction, research strategy and commitments characterized by the transdisciplinary nature of 15 research de- partments, unica is committed to support research through strength- ening international collaborations, researchers’ mobility, attractivity and retention of the talented scholars, as well as participation in european research networks, forefront of institutional commitment to pursue era policy, as witnessed by the strategic plan of the institution and the award in 2024 of the hr excellence in research2 label by the european com- mission for the implementation of the european charter for researchers principles. furthermore, assessment of research quality and impact as well as researchers’ performance and recruitment are at the core of unica strategic policy framework. unica research strategy the 2022-2027 strategic plan3 has been drawn up, with a commit- ment to continuous improvement and on the basis of the quality system adopted by unica, considering all the university’s internal and external stakeholders, especially those connected to the scientific community including academic and administrative staff, early stage and senior re- searchers, civil society, local, national and international institutions. 3 1 home page | university of cagliari 2 https://www.unica.it/it/internazionale/hrs4r-strategy 3 https://web.unica.it/unica/it/ateneo_s09_ss01_sss02_ssss03.page commitments unica believes that a reform of research assessment is needed to align the italian system to the era policy; in fact, the current selec- tion criteria and career system require new efforts and some corrective measures to improve the evaluation systems for research assessment, as already adopted by other international research systems. institutions, research performing and research funding organi- zations at an international level have long been searching for new criteria 1. introduction, research strategy and commitments that can enhance and reward the quality of research. common points of discussion include (but are not limited to) the development of new in- dicators that go beyond quantitative indicators and recognizing criteria such as open science, valorization of research results, research impact, equal opportunities, quality and transparency. with this belief, in 2022 unica joined the initiative “coalition for advancing of research evaluation (coara)”4 and signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra)5. unica agrees on the need to reform research assessment practices, specifically considering re- search quality, ethics, accountability, fairness and impact. research as- sessment should consider both appropriate qualitative and quantitative indicators via peer review for all disciplines. based on that, unica plans its own strategies to recruit and reward best researchers, to support early researchers in the development of their research career, and to offer a vibrant research environment counteract- ing discrimination. to these aims, unica signed the “san francisco dec- laration on research assessment”6 (dora) recognizing and embracing the need towards a reform of the research assessment system improving the ways in which researchers and the outputs of scholarly research are evaluated. the present document (considered as a living document) rep- resents the commitment and agenda of the university of cagliari for implementing the coara strategy in the light of the arra principles in the next year framework 2024-2027, considers synergies with previous commitments of the institution for the hrs4r strategy implementation to support the careers of researchers. 4 4 about - coara 5 the agreement - coara 6 https://sfdora.org/ 2. unica action plan for coara arra implementation in accom- principle unica plished by recognise the according to the otm-r standards, the follow- diversity of ing experiences and achievements will be prop- contributions erly considered in any recruitment regulation: to, and careers • cooperation with foreign and international in, research in organizations and research centers; 2025 accordance with • teaching at foreign universities or highly the needs and qualified international research centers, even nature of the considering virtual mobility experiences; research • achievement of international awards. unica will plan workshops and seminars tai- lored for researchers’ training needs, according to seniority level and experience, as well as their 2027 continuity and refinement on the basis of audi- ence participation and feedback. unica will organize training courses for all re- searchers (r1-r4) on research integrity, intellec- tual property rights, ethics, professional attitude, 2027 and data management to increase awareness 2. unica action plan for coara over professional responsibility. base research unica will define a standard procedure for eval- assessment uating and monitoring the progress of research 2026 primarily on outcomes for recognised researchers (r2). qualitative unica will elaborate guidelines for researchers evaluation for on how to manage and store research data, in which peer compliance with the gdpr, fair principles, re- review is central, sponsible research and innovation principles, supported by 2025 and societal engagement. responsible use of quantitative indicators 6 arra implementation in accom- principle unica plished by abandon an initial pilot project will involve three unica inappropriate departments, on a voluntary basis, testing the uses in research mentorship programme by formally assigning a assessment of senior researcher or expert to r2 and/or r3 re- journal- and searchers depending on department priorities. publication- the mentors will provide career guidance by de- based metrics, signing a personalized career development plan 2026 in particular (pcdp), which should include training needs, inappropriate uses research progress monitoring, mobility phases. of journal impact factor (jif) and h-index avoid the use although unica participates in rankings, it will of rankings not use them to allocate resources or to deter- of research mine the career progression of its researchers. organizations in research assessment 2. unica action plan for coara provide administrative support to researchers in drafting the data management plans requested 2026 by european projects. commit resources to reforming increase the budget assigned to the quality, li- research brary services and museums division with addi- assessment as is 2025 tional resources to support open access (oa) needed to achieve publications. the organizational changes implement an integrated public engagement committed to communication plan including the information 2025 regarding the public engagement and, more generally speaking, the third mission. if not already included in the position’s funding, 2026 provide a starting grant to r3 researchers. 7 arra implementation in accom- principle unica plished by review and developing a standard procedure that applies develop research to all doctoral programmes, which will focus assessment on evaluating and monitoring the research pro- 2024 criteria, tools and gress of r1 researchers. processes update of the code of ethics and conduct by including a commitment to prevent uncon- scious biases by members of selection commit- tees, as requested by its gep. 2024 upon members’ acceptance of the appointment within the selection committees, make them declare that they have read the code of ethics and conduct and the articles of reference. raise awareness training activities organized by a unica multi- of research disciplinary team for the faculty staff with man- assessment reform agerial positions to develop management, or- and provide ganizational and mentoring skills. 2. unica action plan for coara transparent participation in these activities should be man- communication, datory for faculty members in relevant manage- 2027 guidance, and ment positions (e.g., department heads, phd training on coordinators, and supervisors) to ensure good assessment criteria supervision quality. and processes as well as their use unica will organize initiatives (seminars, work- shops) on the thematic of results dissemination and exploitation, and on public engagement to 2027 enhance the awareness of researchers also on the arra principles. 8 arra implementation in accom- principle unica plished by exchange practices appointment of the open science committee and experiences in charge of the development and adoption of 2024 to enable mutual an academic open science policy. learning within unica will organize initiatives (seminars, work- and beyond the shops) on the thematic of results dissemination coalition and exploitation, and on public engagement to 2027 enhance the awareness of researchers. communicate create a section of the unica website to em- progress made phasize good practice in research. on adherence to 2026 the principles and implementation of the commitments evaluate practices, draft of the otm-r institutional policy criteria and tools and setting up a quality control system. based on solid evidence and the 2. unica action plan for coara state-of-the-art in research on 2025 research, this work is licensed under cc by 4.0 9 the document was approved by the academic boards of unica (meetings held in november 2024) contacts: prorettore.ricerca@unica.it hrs4rstrategy@unica.it
