coara action plan 2025 – 2028 setu september 2025 office of research, innovation and impact version 1.0 table of contents 1. introduction and context ................................................................................................................. 3 2. approach to implementing coara at setu ............................................................................. 3 3. research and research culture at setu ..................................................................................... 4 4. actions taken post-coara agreement signature ................................................................... 5 5. working group membership and objectives............................................................................ 5 6. coara action plan ............................................................................................................................. 6 7. implementation, review and communication ........................................................................ 8 glossary of terms ........................................................................................................................................ 10 version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 2 of 11 1. introduction and context south east technological university (setu), a multi campus institution, established on may 1st 2022. with over 19,000 students and 1,800 staff research and innovation is a core activity at setu and is one of our main connection points with industry, the public sector and the community. the strategic plan connecting for impact 2023-2028 sets out an overarching strategic goal for the university to become a “research-led organisation with a demonstrably impactful, innovative, and dynamic research community”. the setu priority areas of research and diverse research units are detailed in the research, innovation and impact (rii) strategic plan connecting research to impact 2025-2028. an elevation of r&i activity and underpinning support structures is mandated by the technological university act 2018 and is a core objective of the setu rii strategic plan. as a new type of university in ireland, the technological university sector does not yet have a formal research career and assessment system in place and this action plan aims to advance progress towards that goal. internationally, research performing and research funding organisations have long been searching for new criteria that can enhance and reward the quality of research. common points of discussion include (but are not limited to) the development of new indicators that go beyond quantitative indicators and recognising criteria such as open science, valorisation of research results, engagement and research impact, equal opportunities, peer review and other service, quality, and transparency. core underpinning elements include recruitment, promotion and awards. institutional changes will lead to the reform of research assessment processes, greater recognition of diverse research outputs driving excellence, new and/or improved services, products, tools, capacity-building programmes, processes, and practice-change supporting impactful research that addresses complex economic, environmental, and societal challenges. in line with this, setu endorsed the initiative “coalition for advancing of research evaluation (coara)” and signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) in may 2023. it is widely acknowledged that a reform of research assessment practices, specifically considering research quality, integrity, accountability and impact is needed. research assessment and peer review should consider both appropriate qualitative and quantitative indicators for all disciplines. 2. approach to implementing coara at setu as a signatory of coara in 2023 and the preceding dora (declaration on research assessment) in 2020, setu promotes responsible research assessment, incorporating a holistic emphasis on the quality of diverse activities and outputs from different disciplines. setu’s commitment as a coara signatory includes designing assessment criteria and processes that emphasise quality, impact, diversity and inclusiveness. this ethos underpins the annual research excellence awards evaluation process, recognising excellent, impactful research and supervision by staff across the university. research excellence awards have been run at setu (at the predecessor institution waterford institute of technology) since 2021. dora compliant cvs and a qualitative narrative are utilised for applications as well as for internal funding calls and phd scholarships. all such awards involve evaluation by a combination of internal and external experts. arra principles are embedded in setu policies governing research conduct and broad consultations were conducted and feedback obtained from staff across all disciplines in version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 3 of 11 their development. the contributor roles taxonomy (credit) is a high-level taxonomy, including 14 roles which describe each contributor’s specific contribution to the scholarly output and is an underpinning principle of the setu authorship policy. credit is increasingly being adopted by publishers as a mechanism to provide structured, interoperable data on the diversity of contributions of different authors and support research attribution, provenance and integrity. at setu adherence with the highest standards of research integrity in the conduct of research is a priority. setu staff, researchers and students are expected to comply with relevant regulations and the “code of conduct for responsible research practice” . setu is a signatory of the national action plan for open research 2022-2030, a primary objective being to achieve 100% open access to research publications by 2030. the setu open research policy was approved in 2024. with a view to conducting societally relevant and accessible research and innovation setu provides training in the implementation of the open research policy. currently, over 50% of research publications are in open access journals. setu is committed to embedding coara and dora principles into all stages of the researcher lifecycle, beginning with recruitment and selection. this includes ensuring that hiring practices move beyond narrow publication metrics and embrace qualitative assessments, narrative cvs, and recognition of diverse research contributions. in partnership with human resources and the office of equality, diversity and inclusion, setu have developed inclusive recruitment guidance and selection/interview panel training to ensure fairness, transparency, and alignment with national and international best practice. 3. research and research culture at setu as a research-led university setu aims to deepen its culture of research by embedding research in all undergraduate programmes and ensuring strong linkages between teaching and research. we will consolidate and strengthen our support infrastructure for researchers in order to better support high-quality research and scholarship. we are informed in our planning in relation to innovation and research by our governing legislation which identifies several performance targets that require the elevation of research activity, graduate student recruitment and staff phd qualifications across the university. as set out in the research, innovation and impact (rii) strategy connecting research to impact 2025-2028 we aim to increase the quantity and quality of our research outputs with a particular focus on high-quality research publications, industry relevance, knowledge transfer and societal impact. at setu a multidisciplinary research approach is critical to answer complex problems, open new areas of research, increase efficiency and to build collaboration across research disciplines, setu campuses and also with external partners. setu waterford has held the "hr excellence in research" award from the european commission (ec), which recognises institutional practices in place to support researchers' career and professional development in line with the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers, since 2014. the award acknowledges setu for providing attractive working conditions and equipping researchers with the broad skills and experience necessary to develop their careers. this designation is a clear statement version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 4 of 11 of our dedication to provide an excellent and supportive environment to researchers. a suite of training courses and wellbeing initiatives, including the broaden your horizons programme and odyssey mentoring programme, are held annually. the broaden your horizons programme is tailored specifically to early- and mid-career researchers and offers practical, cohort-based development pathways that address skills, career planning, and professional identity in a supportive and collaborative environment. the present document (considered as a living document) represents setu’s commitment to implementing the arra principles, taking into account synergies with the rii strategic plan and previous commitments of the european commission’s human resources strategy for researchers (hrs4r) strategy to support the careers of researchers, fostering a supportive and inclusive culture of research excellence. as articulated in the rii strategy “we commit to growing and supporting a positive and healthy research culture and environment that instils core values relating to ambition, scholarship, creativity and transformational impact across all campuses”. 4. actions taken post-coara agreement signature several actions have been delivered since signing the agreement in may 2023, those relevant to the action plan have been incorporated into table 2, below. • engagement of specialised tu rise staff to provide tailored support in recruitment and training • development and provision of impact-related training • expansion of the open research and open data training offerings, in collaboration with library staff • launch of a new research sabbatical scheme, in collaboration with enterprise • launch of a setu staff awards scheme, recognising the contributions of support staff and technicians • roll out of pure (setu’s current research information system) across all campuses, enabling the showcasing of researchers’ achievements and improved tracking of research funding and outputs. 5. working group membership and objectives in order to further advance the arra commitments at setu a working group, comprising the members shown in the table below, was established in 2025. table 1. coara working group members name role dr geraldine canny head of research, chair ms breda connell deputy librarian dr saoirse cummins engaged research, impact and policy officer version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 5 of 11 dr alan davy head of department of computing ms eimear fitzpatrick hr business partner for research ms susie cullinane senior project coordinator mr david kane deputy librarian dr allison kenneally vice president for equality, diversity & inclusion ms jane mahony human resources manager the objectives of this working group are to: • identify barriers and areas to be addressed regarding research assessment in setu • contribute to the development of a coara action plan • raise awareness regarding research culture and assessment • support the implementation and monitoring of the coara action plan • support the integration of career development and progression opportunities into research assessment reform, including structured pathways for ecrs and research staff. the action plan is led by the office of the vice president for research, innovation and impact (rii), in collaboration with members of the executive management team, in particular the vice president for people, culture and equality, diversity and inclusion. the plan is implemented by rii staff in collaboration with researchers across all faculties, with feedback obtained after training and other events to ensure continuous improvement, in line with coara commitment 10. the plan will introduce structured mechanisms for recognizing diverse impact (commitment 1) and promote cultural change towards inclusive evaluation via training and communication (commitment 9). 6. coara action plan the plan comprises actions, each aligned with the relevant commitment or arra principle. the actions listed in the table below are also aligned with the following priority areas of the setu rii strategic plan: • priority area one: strengthening and diversifying research, innovation and knowledge transfer. • priority area two: people, research culture and environment. this action plan will be amended with changes to legislation and other external regulations as well as setu policies and procedures, where applicable. version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 6 of 11 table 2. coara actions, implementation and timelines arra timeline commitment/ implementation details at setu /completed by principle organise initiatives (seminars, workshops) commenced in on the thematic of results dissemination and 2023, ongoing exploitation, engagement and open research, open access provide training on diverse outputs e.g. implement in recognise the podcast training 2026 diversity of impact case study annual competition and commenced in contributions to, dedicated impact webpage showcasing and 2025 and careers in, celebrating impactful research. research annual open research publication/output implement in award 2026 create a dashboard for open research implement in practices, showcasing diverse research 2026 outputs provide tailored workshops and seminars for commenced in researchers at specific career stages (e.g. 2023, ongoing broaden your horizon programme, tu rise training) provide training on research integrity, ethics, commenced in export controls, intellectual property rights, 2023-2024, and data management to increase awareness ongoing raise awareness of of professional responsibility research pure training on profile creation and commenced in assessment reform capturing diverse research outputs 2023, ongoing and provide promote use of persistent identifiers (pids) commenced in transparent via pure 2025, ongoing communication, all phd research and training plans to implement in guidance, and include dissemination and communication 2026 training on training assessment criteria organise initiatives (seminars, workshops) commenced in and processes as on the thematic of results dissemination and 2023, ongoing well as their use exploitation and open research, open access engaged research training and commenced in encouraging/supporting engagement and 2024, ongoing involvement of external stakeholders in research. 70% of setu researchers received impact commenced in training 2024, ongoing version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 7 of 11 support in developing impactful proposals commenced in through theory of change (toc) workshops 2025, ongoing specific to funding calls equality, diversity and inclusion training for commenced in researchers 2023, ongoing narrative cv training for researchers across implement in disciplines at all career stages 2026 integrate narrative cv elements into pure implement in profiles 2026 development of methodologies for impact implement in assessment 2026 review the definition and organisation of implement in research units policy to ensure it captures 2026 current trends and “balanced” evaluation processes develop a researcher career framework - in implement in alignment with the european charter for 2027 researchers, the hr strategy for researchers (hrs4r), and the agreement on reforming review and research assessment (arra). this development of framework will provide clarity, structure, and research transparency for career development and assessment progression across all research roles — criteria, tools and including academic, research-only, technical, processes and hybrid positions. enable peer review and societal engagement commenced in recording in pure 2025, ongoing establishment of a setu publication and data implement in repository 2026 produce a procedure document to implement implement in arra practices recognising diverse research 2027 profiles and outputs updating/completing all pure researcher completed by profiles to include non-traditional outputs end 2027 exchange practices completed by and experiences to successfully obtain funding end 2028 enable mutual under coara boost and commence project learning with and beyond the coalition 7. implementation, review and communication this action plan requires broad support and engagement across setu for implementation, actions will be driven by rii office staff in close collaboration with human resources and library staff, in particular. several of these actions will be progressed by tu rise-funded staff, with continuous data collection conducted in version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 8 of 11 tandem with relevant training. these activities build on previous and ongoing initiatives, including hrs4r. these actions are firmly grounded in setu’s ongoing commitment to the principles of the european commission’s human resources strategy for researchers (hrs4r). they build on progress made through previous and current initiatives under hrs4r and reflect our institution-wide dedication to fostering a supportive, inclusive, and research-enabling environment. as part of this commitment, setu is actively developing a new hrs4r action plan that will shape and align with our strategic goals for researcher development, career progression, and research culture enhancement. the timing of this work is particularly significant, as setu is preparing to reapply for the hr excellence in research award in december 2025. the actions outlined within this plan will directly inform and support that reapplication, demonstrating our ongoing alignment with the principles of the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers, and our ambition to continuously strengthen our research environment. setu commits to strengthening recruitment and selection processes, to promote inclusive hiring practices and to recognising diverse researcher profiles. the effectiveness of setu’s career development initiatives will be monitored through annual surveys, pure data, and programme evaluations. key performance indicators (kpis) include: • % of researchers with a completed personal development plan (pdp) • participation rate in the odyssey mentoring programme and structured development activities • retention rate of researchers, disaggregated by career stage and role type • progression rates into permanent, leadership, or independently funded roles • researcher satisfaction with development opportunities (via annual survey). in line with commitment 9, progress made on the implementation of the commitments will be monitored and communicated. progress on the action plan will be reviewed annually and a report sent to the president and executive management team and once approved subsequently sent to all staff. an annual webinar detailing activities and outcomes over the preceding year will also be organised. the pure system will be integral to monitoring and reporting activities. training activities will incorporate surveys and iterative improvements made based on assessments and feedback received. as such, success indicators include improved enhanced accuracy/timeliness of captured outputs in pure; increased researcher capabilities and satisfaction (measured via surveys/feedback). as a member of coara, setu will communicate progress made and exchange good practice with other members of the coalition, via membership of the coara national platform and membership of working groups. version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 9 of 11 glossary of terms coara - coalition for advancing research assessment established to implement the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra). it brings together institutions committed to transforming research assessment by recognising diverse outputs, emphasising qualitative peer review, and supporting open science. as a coara signatory, setu has pledged to develop and implement an action plan that aligns institutional practices with the core arra commitments. arra - agreement on reforming research assessment this shared framework was developed through a broad consultation process led by the european commission. arra outlines ten core commitments that emphasise quality over quantity, responsible use of metrics, recognition of a diversity of research contributions, and support for open science practices. dora - san francisco declaration on research assessment dora is a global initiative launched in 2013 that calls for improved research assessment practices by discouraging reliance on journal-based metrics such as impact factors. it advocates for the evaluation of research on its own merits, using a broader set of qualitative and quantitative indicators. as a dora signatory, setu is committed to implementing responsible metrics and fostering a culture that values diverse contributions to research and scholarship. cris - current research information system an institutional platform, pure, is used to report on outputs, projects, funding, and researcher profiles. at setu, the cris is implemented through pure. while pure supports internal performance monitoring and external visibility, it complements — but does not replace — the role of an institutional open repository, which is essential for long-term preservation, legal deposit, and open access compliance. credit - contributor roles taxonomy credit is a high-level taxonomy developed to provide transparency in scholarly publishing by clearly identifying the kinds of individual contributions made to research outputs by each author. it defines 14 standardised contributor roles—such as conceptualization, methodology, data curation, writing – original draft, and supervision—allowing precise attribution beyond authorship order. hrs4r - human resources strategy for researchers hrs4r is a european commission initiative that supports research institutions in implementing the principles of the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers (2005). its aim is to foster attractive and supportive research environments through fair recruitment, career development, and working conditions. setu holds the hr excellence in research award, reflecting its commitment to continuous improvement in researcher support. pure - research information management system (elsevier’s platform used at setu) see cris, above. oa - open access version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 10 of 11 open access refers to the free, immediate, and unrestricted online availability of scholarly research outputs, allowing any user to read, download, copy, distribute, or use them with proper attribution. oa is a foundational component of open science, which includes open data, open methods, and open peer review, and is essential for maximising the visibility, accessibility, and impact of research. version 1.0. lead author: dr g. canny, with contributions from coara working group members page 11 of 11
