anid action plan supporting coara commitments 2024 - 2026 version: june/2025 i. introduction instrument to support research in basic science and technological development the national research and development in chile. agency (agencia nacional de investigación • the centres and associative research y desarrollo – anid) is the chilean state sub-directorate seeks to promote agency belongs to the ministry of science, collaboration in research conducted in technology, knowledge and innovation that chile by funding, coordinating and manages and executes programmes and connecting a network of groups instruments that promote, foster and scientific research and centres of develop research in chile, in all areas of excellence in cutting-edge research and knowledge. it was created in 2018 as the technological development with a successor of the conicyt with a new national presence and global impact. it mandate: to achieve greater participation promotes associative research and connection between the actors of the understood as research in which work sti system, linking knowledge and its teams (including researchers, application for the benefit of citizen which knowledge management professionals, delivered the opportunity to propose a new technology transfer experts and way of managing and using the knowledge students, among others) are formed to that is produced with public funds. conduct interdisciplinary research, solving complex problems in science this mission is carried out through its five and technology from different sub-directorates: perspectives and aiming for broad • the human capital sub-directorate solutions. seeks to contribute to the increase of • the applied research and innovation advanced human capital for the sub-directorate labour is to create, development of the country's science disseminate and transfer scientific and and technology by funding postgraduate technological knowledge and master and doctoral scholarships in capabilities in close collaboration and chile and abroad for graduates and partnership with firms and professionals of academic excellence. entrepreneurs, civil society, the state this sub-directorate also seeks and and academia through the management promotes mechanisms to early engage and implementation of programmes and of postgraduates with academia and the instruments that promote the productive sector. production of applied knowledge in • the research projects sub-directorate science, technology and innovation. labour is to strengthen the research • the networks, strategy and knowledge excellence driven by curiosity and sub-directorate creates, designs and focused on strategic areas stimulating implements territorial, national and and promoting national and global international mechanisms and scientific and technological strategies that streamline the integration development through individual and of science, academia, the public sector group scientific research in various and the productive sector as well as areas of knowledge. it allocates strengthen the production of scientific resources through different types of the knowledge and democratise access to national fund for scientific and it. it collaborates and coordinates with technological development, fondecyt, the others sub-directorates created in 1981 as the main public emphasising strategic issues and links with the science, technology, and commitment 1: recognise the diversity of innovation community and other contributions to, and careers in, research in sectors through the design of accordance with the needs and nature of instruments and initiatives for joint the research work. also, it manages anid services anid incorporates the diversity of through different platforms for access to contributions in some of its instruments, data and scientific knowledge as for example: components of r&d activities. • in 2023, the research projects sub- in october 2023, anid signed the directorate updated the curriculum agreement on reforming research assessment criteria which included a assessment (arra) and joined the wider variety of products to be coalition for advancing research considered in the regular fondecyt assessment (coara). it was the first instrument. specifically, for the organisation to join coara in chile. interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary following this milestone, anid began a assessment group, it was proposed to process of reflection and systematisation consider the researcher's position as of research assessment experiences author in scientific articles in journals across the agency's various sub- indexed in web of science and scopus. directorates, with the aim of highlighting in addition, the criteria were progress to date, sharing best practices and standardised for each assessment gathering evidence to further develop those group to clarify the research processes that appear most promising. contributions to be considered and the this was built on the foundation of the work documents required to certify them. that anid had already been doing in • the sub-directorate of centres and research assessment. associative research standardised the this plan outlines past and current assessment of applications for initiatives, and recommendations, to be millennium instruments (nucleus and developed over the course of two years institutes) to incorporate a greater period to advance steps to contribute the number of contributions (from research assessment of research and researchers to innovation and entrepreneurship) and recognising the diverse outputs and make them more relevant to the project professional profiles and activities that for which researchers are applying. this maximise the quality and impact of gives applicants the opportunity to research towards open science practices. choose and present three to five relevant contributions and limits the curriculum assessment stage making the process more efficient. ii. past and current actions anid incorporates the diversity of careers this section reports advances in research in some of its instruments, for example: assessment before and after anid joined • since 2019 the fondecyt postdoctoral the coalition and the information is and the fondecyt initiation instruments organised according to the ten both from the research projects sub- commitments that coara signatories must directorate have incorporated the adopt. academic and research career of the lead researcher as part of the curriculum assessment replacing the productivity factor with the career factor directorate of centres and associative as one of the project assessment research included, as the third and factors. fourth tiebreaker criteria, proposals • starting in 2022 postgraduate whose director or alternate director was scholarships administered by the a female researcher, when the merit of human capital sub-directorate the finalist proposals was equal in incorporate the applicant's academic scoring, to reduce the gender gap. background and work experience into currently, there are no gender equality their assessment of academic career requirements for submitting proposals; criteria. therefore, in addition to however, there are other criteria related considering teaching and research to the gender distribution of the teams activities other activities are also applying. considered such as participation in • to reduce the gender gap, the three projects and work teams in the modalities of the research and productive sector or in public policy development in action instrument (idea programmes, scientific consulting in r&d, idea technological research and ministries, among others. likewise, to idea advanced technologies) of the broaden the scope of contributions to be applied research and innovation sub- considered in the productivity of directorate have implemented three applicants, those associated with measures: i) if the projects applied with applied research, innovation, a women as the project director, entrepreneurship, and artistic creation changes in this position during the are now included. execution of the project cannot consider • in some instruments of the sub- persons of male sex, ii) provide a bonus directorate of applied research and to projects that are suggested for innovation (e.g. idea calls) the approval and that consider a woman in assessment of work teams in the the role of director and iii) consider in the proposals is prioritised over the project assessment process a assessment of each of the members and tiebreaker criterion associated with the the contributions they can make gender parity policy in the event that two individually. or more proposals obtain the same assessment score, favouring the anid incorporates the gender perspective proposal with the greatest gender in its instruments, for example: balance within the research team or the • the postgraduate scholarships project whose director is a woman. administered by the human capital • in the alma, quimal and gemini sub-directorate incorporate a gender astronomy funds instruments of the perspective in the assessment of networks, strategy and knowledge sub- applications. currently, children during directorate it are assigned extra points to the assessment period are also a factor proposals directed by a woman as the to consider in the criteria for career principal investigator, those whose and/or academic performance in the sponsoring institution is located in a case of female applicants, for example, region other than the metropolitan in the case of scientific productivity in region and those whose activities are the context maternity leave and carried out in region other than the childcare. metropolitan region. this action aims to • in 2020, and for the only time, the reduce the gender and territorial gaps. millennium institute call of the sub- anid incorporates the territorial commitment 2: base research assessment perspective in its instruments, for example: primarily on qualitative evaluation for which peer review is central, supported by • the human capital sub-directorate responsible use of quantitative indicators incorporates the territorial perspective in the assessment pointing out that: i) in the assessment processes anid applicants can access bonds in the final considers the qualitative evaluation of score by proving acceptance into a applications and projects conducted by programme (host university) in a region national and/or international peer of chile other than the metropolitan, reviewers and various relevant committees obtaining their bachelor's or (committee of programme, assessment professional title (university of origin) or committee, committee of area, joint primary or secondary education license committee, technical advisory (schooling) in a region of chile other committee) for each instrument and call. than the metropolitan, ii ) there is a sub- these committees provide feedback and criterion of the applicant's obligations rate their reviews using a standard scoring with a territorial perspective where scale (see next point). evaluator profiles are applicants must contribute back not relevant to the type of project and there are only to scientific and social different profiles depending on the development but also the territorial instrument, e.g. academic profiles, contribution, that is, the programme is productive sector profiles. carried out in universities in regions anid uses a standard scoring scale ranging other than the metropolitan and iii) in the from zero (failed) to five (excellent) to rate particular case of international the stages and assessment criteria scholarships to pay back them holders established in the call rules. all call rules who have returned to chile and reside in contain a grading scale with each grade regions other than the metropolitan associated with its meaning and must prove their residence time in chile description. the scores are arranged in for the same duration as the descending order and a ranking is compiled scholarship. this is unlike scholarship to accompany the recommendations for recipients residing in the metropolitan awarding proposals. region who must prove their residence time in chile for twice the duration of the anid bases research assessment on scholarship. qualitative evaluation and peer review is central, for example: anid incorporates the open science perspective in its instruments, for example: • the assessment of applications for postgraduate scholarships • the networks strategy and knowledge administered by the human capital sub-directorate bases the assessment sub-directorate uses parameterised of some of its instruments on open components with scores calculated science (e.g., knowledge 2030 and using formulas approved by institutional engineering for 2030) thereby linking resolution and published in conjunction results between projects funded by the with the opening of the calls. these same sub-directorate and others from components respond to the annual other sub-directorates, for example, guidelines of the public sector budget those aimed at meeting the needs of law through budget allocations for industry and society in order to amplify national and international scholarships. the impact of the projects. these components assess applicants' academic background based on their commitment 3: abandon inappropriate grade point average for their bachelor's uses in research assessment of journal- degree, professional degree or and publication-based metrics, in equivalent, and their undergraduate particular inappropriate uses of journal graduation ranking depending on their impact factor (jif) and h-index ranking in their graduating class or in chile the current legislation indicates degree programme, for national that the accounting of scientific output scholarships. additionally, for from web of science (wos) and scientific international scholarships there is a electronic library online (scielo) is used parameterised component to assess the to distribute monetary fiscal contributions level, quality and track record of the to universities. foreign institution and study programme. this allows applicants to also, at the national level the allocation of know in advance of their application the resources based on performance to scores they will receive based on the universities is based on the accounting of respective criteria and the methodology publications indexed in scopus. used to obtain those scores. the on the other hand, anid uses own rankings methodology was revised in 2020, and and publication-based metrics in research adjustments were made that remain in assessment, for example: place today. applicants can simulate their academic record score and their • in the human capital sub-directorate, ranking score for academic and non- the ranking of institutions to qualify the academic foreign institutions by oecd level, quality and trajectory of the foreign sub-area using the simulator software institution and study programmes is of tools available on anid's website. its own creation and is constructed • since 2020 the fondecyt initiation according to the level of scientific instrument from the research projects productivity of the institutions using sub-directorate has incorporated a bibliometric data from incites (web of double-blind evaluation system which science, clarivate analytics). was a change implemented within the • for the fondecyt interdisciplinary and framework of the ministry of science, transdisciplinary assessment group of technology, knowledge, and the research projects sub-directorate it innovation's gender policy establishing was proposed to consider and assign two evaluation stages. specific scores according to the • the application and assessment researcher's position as author in the process for the global healthy longevity scientific article of journals indexed in challenge (nam) instrument of the web of science and scopus. applied research and innovation sub- directorate is streamlined requiring the completion of a two-page application commitment 4: avoid the use of rankings of form and a short four-slide presentation. research organisations in research furthermore, the evaluation is blind. assessment the human capital sub-directorate develops its own rankings for i) the grade point average of applicants' bachelor's degree, professional degree or equivalent, ii) the undergraduate graduation ranking depending on the percentage where the applicant is placed in their graduating class changes in assessment processes/models or degree, and iii) the level, quality and of the instruments they administer. trajectory of the foreign institution and more specifically: study programme. this ranking of institutions is divided into academic and • in the human capital sub-directorate, non-academic institutions and is ordered the professionals worked with the according to their level of scientific assessment committees, the technical productivity for each of the 39 oecd advisory committee, and mathematical subareas based on bibliometric data from and statistical experts in the review and incites (web of science, clarivate modification of the parameterised analytics). the use of these rankings is components of the application justified by: i) the operationalisation of the evaluation. indications that the public sector budget • in the research projects sub- law made to anid through the specific directorate, the professionals worked notes in which national and international with the assessment groups of the postgraduate scholarships are assigned, ii ) different areas, the scientific the legitimacy by applicants of the use of coordination, technical analysts and parameterised components in the project executives of the sub-directorate assessment methodology observed by the to study and make improvements to the low rate of complaints associated with the assessment criteria and elaboration of assignment of scores, and iii ) the efficiency the fondecyt project evaluation guide. in the assessment process of the • the networks, strategy and knowledge applications that is exhaustive and sub-directorate has allocated staff includes several stages, in the rapid hours to work on research assessment delivery of the results and in the activities after anid signed the arra optimisation of institutional resources. for and joined coara including the the period 2017-2024 an average of 301 research and systematisation of the applications were received for the experiences and best practices on anid international doctoral scholarships (becas research assessment. chile) with 2017 receiving the highest number of applications (394) and an average of 2,512 applications for national commitment 6: review and develop doctoral scholarships for the period 2017- research assessment criteria, tools and 2025 with 2025 receiving the highest processes number of applications (3,359). the results the formation of the ministry of science, of the latest calls for national and technology, knowledge and innovation and international scholarships were published anid as the successor to conicyt two and a half months from the closing date initiated a process of reviewing and for receiving applications. improving the research instruments with the aim of helping to ensure greater equity among those applying for scholarship commitment 5: commit resources to programmes. this process included the reforming research assessment as is study and proposed changes to the 2020 needed to achieve the organisational undergraduate academic record changes committed to parameterisation algorithm of the human in all anid sub-directorates there are capital sub-directorate. experienced professionals and work teams who reflect on and have implemented the assessment processes for both commitment 7: raise awareness of applications and projects of the different research assessment reform and provide anid’s sub-directorates consider more transparent communication, guidance, and than one stage including quantitative and training on assessment criteria and qualitative evaluation using different tools processes as well as their use relevant to each of the instruments, e.g., in july 2024, anid co-produced the assessment of individual researchers' cvs, international seminar “fair assessment of assessment of research groups, science and quality of the higher assessment of background cvs, evaluation education system in chile” that brought through interviews, own rankings, etc. together different actors from the sti the fondecyt research project evaluation community to reflect on new models for guide from the research projects sub- research assessment and opened a space directorate updated in 2023 is an important for a dialogue to share experiences within tool that establishes the review and the framework of the transition toward open evaluation process for applications knowledge. key notes speakers submitted to calls which guides and participated in the event. more information provides the technical guidelines for the at https://acceso- work of evaluators and the assessment abierto.anid.cl/seminario_evaluacion/ groups in charge of this task. in december 2024, anid produced the the sub-directorate of centres and event jóvenes conciencia to foster associative research emphasises that for collaboration and interdisciplinary work the submission and assessment of among young researchers from anid’ proposals for the anillos instrument it uses centres with presentations, roundtable the metadata from the institutional discussions and other activities aimed at platform researcher portal generating reflection on the management, (https://investigadores.anid.cl/) to record importance, and impact of open research scientific productivity as a reference and data. an international expert participated in guide. the anid researcher portal is the event. more information at currently being updated to include a wide https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jy8ln7 range of scientific output beyond scientific jl5i4 articles and books and other elements are also in december 2024, anid organised the being incorporated into the curriculum. conference “open research data: how to anid has updated the institutional transition from infrastructure to services” repository where participants reflected on the (https://repositorio.anid.cl/home) with new challenges and opportunities in open collections to comply with the open research data management in chile. an access policy obligations and a more user- international expert participated in the friendly interface for diverse audiences. event. more information at https://acceso- abierto.anid.cl/datos-de-investigacion- anid is evaluating to propose a national abiertos/ chapter of coara. the research projects sub-directorate has developed guidelines and conducted training on the assessment processes of the instruments it administers. this includes the fondecyt research project evaluation guide to study and test evaluation guidelines in the explorer plan. it is recognised that adherence to the instrument which has allowed for reflection principles and implementation of coara's and review of assessment factors and commitments must be evaluated in methods, evaluation guidelines for the context. implementation of blind evaluation for assessment groups, evaluation guidelines for project executives and in 2020 an commitment 10: evaluate practices, international seminar reviewing criteria and tools based on solid evidence international experiences with blind and the state-of-the-art in research on evaluation with assessment groups. more research, and make data openly available information at https://anid.cl/seminario- for evidence gathering and research anid-abre-la-discusion-sobre-modelos- in november 2024, anid professionals de-evaluacion/ from the networks, strategy and knowledge sub-directorate gathered experiences in research assessment of the commitment 8: exchange practices and different sub-directorates from primary experiences to enable mutual learning sources through interviews with the work within and beyond the coalition teams and from secondary sources such as in august 2024 anid formed a working institutional reports, guides and group on research assessment with presentations, institutional databases and professionals of the five sub-directorates to resolutions and information published on reflect, exchange best practices and anid's website. then they systematised experiences on assessment models and to those experiences and wrote a report. work in improvement the anid assessment examples of the evaluation of practices and processes. criteria based on evidence are: in january 2025 anid formed an expert • in 2020 the human capital sub- group on research assessment with directorate reviewed the methodology research vice rectors from universities who for calculating undergraduate academic have vast experience in the design and records to evaluate applications for implementation on new forms of research postgraduate scholarships making assessment. adjustments that remain in place to this anid professionals have participated in the day. members of the mathematical general assembly meetings and other sciences assessment committee, meetings organised by coara. members of the sub-directorate's technical advisory committee, mathematical and statistical experts, commitment 9: communicate progress the national director of anid and made on adherence to the principles and professionals from the sub-directorate implementation of the commitments participated in this process. simulations in may 2024, the deputy director of the were conducted and scenarios were networks, strategy and knowledge sub- built using real data from previous calls. directorate made a presentation for the this revision is published on the anid deputy directors of the others sub- website and is accessible to anyone. directorates and department heads where • in 2021 and 2022 the research projects explained the meaning and commitments sub-directorate reviewed and evaluated to be part of coara and proposed an action the double-blind evaluation changes incorporated into the fondecyt initiation instrument adjusting the assessment guidelines and reflection on assessment stages and adding the anonymisation factors and methods. requirement as an admissibility • in the research projects sub- criterion. an initial examination of the directorate proposals for changes results of the double-blind evaluation regarding the diversification of research showed that the most visible effects of products, the incorporation of diverse its implementation are relatively recent, professional careers and double-blind and it takes time to observe the changes. evaluation, all within fondecyt the double-blind evaluation was highly instruments were discussed and valued by participants in the 2023 anid supported with analysis of data from working groups which analysed gender, previous years' calls. international territorial and disciplinary gaps in experiences were also reviewed, and addressing potential biases in the guidelines were designed and process. it is recognised that implemented. in 2020, a seminar was simultaneous changes in the held with the assessment groups to assessment model (in trajectory and in review international experiences with double-blind evaluation) complicates blind evaluation. a variety of indicators the analysis as does the evaluation at using different sources of information different stages. and data from previous years' calls were • in 2023 the research projects sub- used to assess the quality of the directorate made changes to the evaluation process and its impact on curriculum assessment criteria for bias reduction. assessment groups. the scientific coordination provided evidence through data analysis, scenario construction iii. recommended longer-term and the elaboration of graphs to present actions and support the proposals and including as many contributions as possible the below suggestions are based on shared considering progressive changes, experiences and comments from the sub- respecting the autonomy of the groups, directorates work teams to advance safeguarding the impartiality of the reflection and changes to anid's research interests of their members and ensuring evaluation models and processes. the feasibility of implementing the changes in the both platforms: anid 1.- the formation of anid in january 2020 curriculum evaluation system (sec - for as an agency part of chile's new scientific its spanish acronym) and the anid and technological institutional framework, online evaluation system (sel - for its led by the ministry of science, technology, spanish acronym). knowledge, and innovation and as the • in 2023 the research projects sub- successor to conicyt (national research directorate published an update to the and development commission), has a fondecyt research project evaluation vision that reinterprets and enriches the guide which brings together all the work developed by its predecessor, aligned changes introduced in recent years to with the country's current needs and fondecyt instruments. serving the society. in this context, • the research projects sub-directorate's rethinking the agency's role in relation to exploration project call (launched for the management and use of knowledge the first time in 2022) has allowed for produced with the public funds allocated exploration and testing of evaluation also means rethinking ways of evaluating research. it is therefore necessary to create institutional strengthening. it is necessary working opportunities to reflect and rethink to analyse how to articulate anid's research evaluation models in terms of the instruments to strengthen the sti purpose of the evaluations, projects, ecosystem and more efficiently leverage its researchers, products to be considered, skills. to begin a diagnosis, it is possible to methodologies, tools, and sources of apply a theoretical framework to evaluate information to be used, quality metrics, and characterise each of its instruments scientific-technological and economic- according to the level of sophistication in social impact metrics, among others. the management of the instrument, the degree to which the instrument promotes 2.- the gathering of information in 2024 on and values the production of new scientific research evaluation experiences presented knowledge and the degree to which it in this document revealed a need of promotes and values the practical documentation and systematisation of the application of knowledge, and using a changes that the sub-directorates have portfolio view that allowed the instruments discussed and implemented, as well as the to be classified. from there, a proposal was decisions that justify those changes. made to improve the programmatic offering having a registration procedure and a and restructure the portfolio of projects to digital space where the sub-directorates be funded. this view can offer a conceptual can document their own experiences and framework for rethinking the design and share information would contribute to the orientation of the instruments, considering institutional record and memory on the the need to broaden the scope and include institutional research evaluation. new research evaluation metrics that go 3. - the sub-directorates work teams beyond bibliometric indicators and can acknowledge the need of the agency's own capture contributions to understanding studies that include state-of-the-art multidimensional problems and the ability information, experiences and best to guide solutions. the sub-directorates practices on national and international work teams recognise that the diversity of research evaluation models to propose and instruments complicates the methods and technically support decisions and changes processes of research evaluation, however, in evaluation processes, as well as the finding common areas of evaluation among decisions reported by the ministry of sub-directorates would allow for synergies. science. furthermore, a need of evidence, 5.- anid receives a large volume of studies, results, and evaluation of anid's proposals (applications) and projects for own practices and their impact on the evaluation, which entails significant effort ecosystem was detected. also, technical and costs that impact evaluation times and support to advance these types of studies budget execution deadlines. the quality of and analyses is required. anid's evaluations and feedback is valuable for department of studies and strategic both applicants and beneficiaries. in management is crucial for implementing addition, analysts and project executives actions and addressing this issue. perform routine administrative tasks that 4.- anid opens around 80 calls per year and often leave no time to reflect and rethink offers a wide variety of different types of their own practices. the use of artificial funding from postgraduate scholarships to intelligence in some tasks can contribute to funding to support basic research, reducing time and making processes more technological development, innovation efficient, which would allow time to be and entrepreneurship, with multiple allocated to more complex activities. scopes on individual and joint projects, on review the agency's procedures and iii) evaluate the formation of a differentiate team tasks, focusing them, for working group between anid and example, on monitoring and control teams, the ministry of science to jointly teams in charge of expense reports, teams address topics of interest, in charge of research evaluation, etc. could iv) promote the exchange of best contribute to the new challenges and new practices and experiences based mandates of anid and have evaluations on open science projects fund by that are more consistent with these new anid and execute by universities to agency missions. open science capacity building 6.- to continue with the recommendations (proyectos ines ciencia abierta in and work of the working group and expert spanish), and group on research assessment the v) communicate, raise awareness, following topics are suggested: and disseminate anid's progress i) maintain reviewing international on research assessment to experiences on research evaluation stakeholders. relevant to the chilean ecosystem, ii) agree on a proposal to integrate existing coara working groups,
