action plan coara 2024-2027 zonmw and nwo date june 2025 subject reforming research assessment: coara action plan zonmw & nwo authors (in alphabetical order by surname) robert jabroer, hans de jonge, daphne kortbeek, tamara van mölken, eline pronk, sarah steendam, jeroen sondervan, marta teperek, ingrid van tienen, thecla van wageningen, helga varwijk, sanneke van vliet status final version version 2.0 introduction the netherlands organisation for health research and development (zonmw), a research funding organisation, and the dutch research council (nwo), a research funding and research performing organisation, have been actively working on the reform of their research assessment within the national recognition and rewards programme. in december 2019, the position paper ‘room for everyone’s talent: towards a new balance in the recognition and rewards for academics’ was published by the universities of the netherlands (unl), the netherlands federation of university medical centres (nfu), the royal netherlands academy of arts & sciences (knaw), nwo and zonmw. to put the priorities from the position paper into practice, a road map was designed at the end of 2023. the objectives of this national program are: • diversification and vitalisation of career paths; • achieving balance between individuals and the collective; • focusing on quality; • stimulating all aspects of open science; • encouraging academic leadership. in 2022 zonmw and nwo signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) and joined the coalition on advancing research assessment. by signing, our organisations continue their efforts for the reform of research assessment in an international context. the goals of this reform movement are largely in line with the goals set in the national recognition and rewards programme. this means that we have already made several changes to our research assessment, that help meet the goals set in the coara commitments. in this action plan, we outline future practices and activities as well as those that have already been embedded within our organisations. this plan reflects and features the dual role of nwo as both a research funding and research performing organisation (through the ten research institutes that are under the umbrella of the nwo organisation). as our organisations are actively working together, this plan reflects on practices and activities in both our organisations and that are carried out within the four domains (science, social sciences and humanities, applied and engineering sciences and medical sciences (zonmw)), the four taskforces (dutch climate research initiative - kin, netherlands initiative for education research - nro, open science nl - osnl and the taskforce for applied research - sia) and the ten research institutes (nwo-i). we hope this plan leads to mutual learning and inspiration and shows our continued support for this important movement. action plan the section below describes the current state towards the implementation of the arra commitments, as well as planned future actions. commitment current state actions 1: recognise the diversity evidence-based cv has been introduced for all individual grants. nwo and zonmw will: of contributions to, and it consists of two parts: a narrative academic profile and a list of - look into enabling of the reporting of diverse research careers in, research in key-output. the narrative academic profile allows applicants to outputs in its future grants management system, which is accordance with the highlight their own academic achievements without being currently being developed. needs and nature of the limited by prescribed questions. applicants are asked to research highlight their most relevant academic abilities and - revise their research data management policy to make it achievements, and to provide context and evidence of how more inclusive of other research outputs. these elements demonstrate their academic qualities. in the key- output section applicants are requested to list and provide - investigate the possibilities of enabling support staff to be context for up to 10 outputs that best demonstrate their part of paid research teams in grant proposals. qualities, and that are relevant to the application, their own and/or other scientific fields, the research idea and/or society. a the taskforce for applied research (sia) will investigate the use of broad definition of output is used, and applicants can list both the evidence-based cv for specific (if/when applicable) grant more "traditional" output items such as scholarly articles and applications from universities of applied sciences. more "non-traditional" outputs, such as datasets, exhibitions, visual media, patents and software. nwo is committed to the further development, implementation and funding of open research europe (ore) publishing service, which to reduce gender bias in the assessment procedure, within the supports publishing of research articles and 13 other types of pre-application phase of the talent schemes, applicants are publications (including methods, software tools, study protocols, and instructed not to use any first names or pronouns in the case reports). application. this information is only listed in the database which is not visible for the reviewers. nwo actively participates in the coara working group towards as the time researchers can spend on research is important and transformations: transdisciplinarity, applied/practice-based differs based on individual contracts, within the individual grant research, and impacts and will actively participate in the national applications, applicants are asked to give an estimate of their expertise centre for transdisciplinary work (nectr) to exchange effective research time. the assessment committee is requested information and support consortium development for to take this contextual information into account when assessing transdisciplinary research, recognizing outputs involving different the evidence-based cv. (research) stakeholders. nwo has developed two instruction videos on the inclusive nwo-i will work towards more formalized time-for-time assessment of diverse career paths. the videos are intended for compensation for non-traditional research outputs. reviewers and committee members involved in the evaluation process and provide information about implicit bias and the (often limited) image of what is a good researcher or a good proposal. for funded projects applicants are requested, during and after the project phase, to not only report on output such as scholarly articles but to also include other research results/output such as datasets, software, workflows, protocols, prototypes, intellectual property rights, and standards. nwo provided funding for the establishment of publinova, an online platform which increases the impact and visibility of research results and outputs from practice-oriented research. nwo is supporting and hosting open science nl, which is the national programme that aims to promote and accelerate the transition to open science in the netherlands. nwo has increased the possibilities for funding for multidisciplinary research by consortia and team science through the dutch research agenda and the knowledge and innovation convenant (kic). nwo and zonmw signed the amsterdam declaration on funding research software sustainability (adore) with the commitment to include research software in open science policies and to strengthen cooperation with other organisations in this area. 2: base research nwo and zonmw’s grant award procedures have always been the evaluation of the evidence-based cv and promoting the assessment primarily on based on robust qualitative assessments with a clear focus on importance of qualitative evaluation in research assessment will be qualitative evaluation for peer-review. our organisations make use of (broad) assessment included in the programme evaluation of the nwo talent programme which peer review is committees and/or external reviewers and, if applicable, reviews (veni, vidi, vici scheme), which offers individual grants to talented central, supported by from industry and professional stakeholders in the assessment researchers. responsible use of of the applications within our grant award procedures. quantitative indicators moreover, quantitative indicators have never played a formal nwo-i will work towards setting standards for hiring and promotion role in these procedures. following the signing of the dora committees. declaration, nwo and zonmw gradually introduced an evidence-based cv (formerly narrative cv) for all individual grants which allows for a more qualitative assessment of applicants and a further reduction of the uncritical use of (quantitative) bibliometric indicators. nwo and zonmw support applicants in the responsible use of quantitative indicators by giving a wide variety of examples of indicators that can be used in the evidence-based cv and provides instructions on including substantiation. nwo is a member of the peer exchange platform for narrative- style cvs (pep-cv), which promotes experience sharing and best practices in the implementation of narrative-style cvs. 3. abandon inappropriate nwo and zonmw have signed the dora declaration and as a nwo and zonmw will monitor and evaluate previous actions. uses in research result have implemented the following measures: assessment of journal- - removal of all quality indicators that do not relate to a single nwo and zonmw are committed to open research europe, where and publication-based output item, such as references to journal impact factors each article has a dedicated page of article-level metrics. metrics, in particular and the h-index, in all call texts and application forms. inappropriate uses of - actively informing applicants, referees and committee journal impact factor members about the policy changes that follow from the (jif) and h-index signing of dora. - introduction of the evidence-based cv (formerly narrative cv). within taskforce sia, above measures have already been implemented, as these types of metrics are not used in practice- based research. nwo-i has avoided use of publication-based metrics in their research evaluation in 2023. 4. avoid the use of within nwo and zonmw grant application the use or mention rankings of research of rankings of research organisations is not allowed and rankings organisations in research of research organisations are not used in the assessment of assessment research proposals. 5. commit resources to nwo and zonmw have two joined project groups: nwo and zonmw intend to investigate the possibility of introducing reforming research - overseeing the institutional commitment to recognition and the assessment of open science practices within scientific quality assessment as is needed rewards. criteria of research proposals. to achieve the - overseeing the institutional commitment to diversity, equity, organisational changes and inclusion. committed to an nwo colleague is member of the coara steering board. both nwo and zonmw are actively participating in several coara working groups. the open science nl programme, which is hosted by nwo, funded national efforts to coordinate and exchange best practices for embedding open science in institutional hiring and promotion policies. at taskforce sia there is a programme dedicated to the further development and strengthening the profession and the field of practice-based research. 6. review and develop nwo is the co-owner of the strategy evaluation protocol (sep), nwo and zonmw are planning to evaluate the evidence-based cv. research assessment which provides a framework for research evaluation of the criteria, tools and dutch universities and the research institutes of nwo and nwo and zonmw are committed to evaluating internal review processes knaw. nwo took an active role in revisions of the protocol, procedures concerning assessment criteria. which led to creation of the current sep 2021-2027. aspects such as open science and academic culture are embedded within nwo is actively involved in mid-term evaluation of the strategy that protocol. evaluation protocol, with the aim to further embed the coara commitments, including open science. taskforce sia was involved in the actualisation of equivalent of sep at universities of applied sciences: bko (brancheprotocol nwo will review its research data management policy in 2025 and kwaliteitszorg onderzoek in dutch; sector protocol for quality will investigate the possibility to embed the evaluation of open assurance in research in english) and has played an active role in science practices in grant proposals as part of the process. the connection between bko and sprong principles (sia financing scheme). 7. raise awareness of there is an ongoing cycle of communication around coara and nwo and zonmw intend to continue their current activities. research assessment recognition & rewards within zonmw and nwo. reform and provide nwo and zonmw intend to raise more awareness concerning transparent nwo and zonmw train their assessment committees on research assessment reform within the organisations, including the communication, assessment criteria and inclusive assessment and are practices of research assessment at universities of applied science/ guidance, and training on continuously working on the development of call assessment taskforce sia. assessment criteria and guideline documents for the assessment committee, referees processes as well as their and applicants (including guidance on how to assess evidence- nwo-i will provide a leadership programme which features tools for use based cv). a new way of research assessment. nwo actively contributes (workshops, talks etc) to the yearly national recognition and rewards festival. nwo regularly shares awareness raising posts on the open science blog. 8. exchange practices and zonmw and nwo are active members of the national nwo and zonmw intend to continue their current activities. experiences to enable recognition and rewards programme, take active parts in mutual learning within national events, and contribute to discussions on the national nwo and zonmw are involved in the establishment of the coara and beyond the coalition forum for recognition and rewards (online platform rrview). national chapter. nwo is a member of the peer exchange platform for narrative- taskforce sia intends to exchange visits with colleagues from style cvs (pep-cv), which promotes experience sharing and best universities of applied sciences. practices in the implementation of narrative-style cvs. nwo is an active member of science europe and is involved in several working groups where practices and experiences are exchanged, and the discussion on research assessment among funders are stimulated. the president of nwo is the vice- president of science europe (november 2023 – november 2025). nwo is a member of the european open science cloud (eosc) association. nwo colleagues have been regularly participating in bilateral discussions with colleagues from other countries about various aspects pertaining to reforming research assessment, such as open science implementation in hiring and promotion criteria. nwo is actively participating in various unesco activities (workshops, events), in particular concerning open science aspects of research assessment. 9. communicate progress zonmw and nwo are active members of the national zonmw and nwo will share this action plan on zenodo. made on adherence to recognition and rewards programme, take active parts in the principles and national events, and contribute to discussions on the national implementation of the forum for recognition and rewards (rrview). commitments 10. evaluate practices, zonmw and nwo are actively involved in its own research on nwo and zonmw intend to continue their current activities. criteria and tools based research programme, and within that programme, are on solid evidence and the committed to several projects concerning research evaluation. state-of-the-art in nwo is involved in five rori projects regarding the narrative cv and research on research, and nwo provides funding for several crucial infrastructures which trans- and interdisciplinary research. make data openly are essential for providing open and transparent data (e.g., available for evidence orcid, ror, etc.) to support research assessment nwo intends to develop tools for enabling such evaluation, including gathering and research (https://www.nwo.nl/en/open-science-infrastructure-support). enabling the reporting and monitoring the impact of diverse types of nwo is member of the global research initiative on open research outputs. science (grios, which supports meta-research on open science to help funders, research organisations, and policymakers nwo and zonmw are planning to evaluate the evidence-based cv. enhance efficiency and maximise the impact of their open science strategies. nwo-i is establishing a ‘to measure is to know’ approach to policy change. open science nl has committed 17.5m eur to building and sustaining open science infrastructures in years 2024-2025. zonmw and nwo publish regular reports on monitoring open access to publishing and recently also investigated the practices of publishing of research data and software as a result of its funding. all data and software underpinning these reports are openly available. to support transparent and sustainable research assessment, nwo implemented grantids. nwo is partner of the research-on-research institute (rori) and, as part of that partnership, is committed to several research-on-research projects. nwo is a signatory and is actively involved in the barcelona declaration on open research information.
