association of erc grantees action plan in fulfilment of the commitments of the agreement on reforming research assessment v1.2 (02.10.2024) as a signatory of the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), the association of erc grantees (aerg) is dedicated to fulfilling its associated ten commitments. however, due to the nature of aerg and its member selection criteria, we do not independently evaluate research or researchers. research assessment at the aerg the association of erc grantees is a membership organization for principal investigators funded by the european research council (erc), whereby a successful grant application automatically entitles an individual researcher to become a member of aerg. we therefore do not independently evaluate research or researchers directly but rely on the evaluation conducted by the expert peer evaluation panels of the erc. for this reason, the four main commitments of arra do not directly apply to the aerg, apart from our role in advocating for and support of reforms of the erc’s internal evaluation practices. for some of the six supporting commitments, on the other hand, we have a more direct role to play, as outlined below. core commitments the agreement is based on four core commitments: 1. , research in accordance with the needs and the nature of the research 2. for which peer-review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators 3. , 4. the aerg does not evaluate research or researchers directly, and thus neither can it directly apply commitments 1 and 2, nor does it engage in the practices mentioned in commitments 3 and 4. therefore there are no reforms foreseen for aerg to fulfil the four core commitments. supporting commitments the agreement includes six further supporting commitments: 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to no organizational changes are foreseen to be needed to fulfil our commitments, although the aerg will closely monitor the developments in this space and will adapt as needed accordingly. 2 6. the aerg does not directly develop criteria, tools or process, but does actively participate in discussions of these developments, as well as providing a researcher perspective into the reforms, including the coara working groups that do this work. the aerg also participated in the erc workshop on reform of research assessment in 2022, which informed its own recent and highly laudable reforms.1 7. the aerg was one of the original signatories of the agreement on reforming research assessment, and thus has contributed to raising awareness and supporting the reforms both amongst its members and the broader research community. in particular, the aerg board of directors includes the elected coara steering board (2022– 2024) member prof. toma susi amongst its ranks, who has given numerous talks on the importance and implementation of the reforms in recent years. another aerg board member prof. agnieszka wykowska represents the association in the era forum, which has another crucial role to play in the reforms. the aerg board expects such activities to continue in the coming years. 8. the aerg is a member of the coara working group “improving practices in the assessment of research proposals”, contributing to the exchange of practices and mutual learning. further working groups and other opportunities will be taken up as and when the aerg feels it can make an impactful contribution within the resources we have. 9. this action plan is the first concrete deliverable in fulfilment of this commitment, and will be followed by periodic updates if needed, as well as the mandatory further report within five years of our signing the agreement. 10. , no direct contribution to research on research, apart from potentially facilitating surveys of our membership touching on relevant issues, are foreseen. 1 maria leptin, “evaluation of research proposals: the why and what of the erc's recent changes” (2024) https://erc.europa.eu/news-events/news/evaluation-research-proposals-why-and-what-ercs-recent-changes 3 conclusion the association of erc grantees fully supports and aligns with the aims and commitments of the agreement for reforming research assessment and the coara work more broadly. we particularly warmly welcome the recent well-justified changes made to the erc evaluation processes, which align it with coara. we will continue to monitor and support these developments, and to seek out new ways to proactively contribute to the much-needed and long-overdue reforms. 4
