budapest university of technology and economics coara action plan organization budapest university of technology and economics responsible person rector contact person prof. gergely attila zaránd vice-rector for science other persons contributing to the action cecília liszkay plan beáta nyitrai-povolnik about bme the budapest university of technology and economics (bme) is one of hungary's leading higher education institutions, with a history covering more than 240 years. bme offers a wide range of courses in engineering, information technology, economics, and natural sciences and is committed to high-quality teaching and research. bme aims to equip its students with state- of-the-art knowledge and skills to succeed in the global labour market. bme's international reputation is based on its excellent teaching and research staff and an exceptional involvement in national and international research projects. bme's research activities range from basic research and developing cutting-edge technologies to industrial cooperation and innovation. the university maintains close links with national and international industrial partners and ensures that its research output entails direct industrial applications. with its 21,000 students and 1,200 full-time lecturers and researchers, bme plays a central role in hungarian higher education and research in engineering and actively contributes to scientific and technological development in central europe. bme has eight faculties hosting a diverse educational program and a wide range of research laboratories. the university's student and faculty community is dynamic and diverse and provides an inspiring environment for study and research. bme is committed to continue to be a leader in engineering and business education and to contribute to europe’s sustainable future. 1 synopsis of current evaluation practices bme has embraced the principles of responsible research assessment1 and is committed to its promotion both nationally and internationally. the university is also committed to integrating fair and responsible assessment in its internal evaluation processes. at the same time, bme recognizes the corresponding initiatives of the hungarian accreditation board and the hungarian academy of sciences, as well as coara. our current practices for measuring research performance are as follows: 1. only bodies endowed with appropriate knowledge (the members of which have at least a phd degree) may assess research performance. 2. in order to reduce bias and partiality, the participation of external members – not employed by the bme and possibly of foreign nationality – should also be included in the appropriate panels. in all cases, the composition of the bodies set up under the bme doctoral and habilitation procedures shall comply with these principles. 3. bme’s university habilitation committee and doctoral council (ehbdt), the specialty disciplinary habilitation committee and doctoral council (hbdt), and the council of doctoral schools (dits) oversee research performance evaluation in the case of conferring phd degrees, habilitations, the honorary doctorates and the neumann professorships. these committees are also responsible for evaluating research performance prior to the appointment of university professors, scientific advisors, and research professors. 4. when evaluating research performance, peer review/evaluation plays a central role. quantitative measures are mainly used to assess whether the candidate meets certain minimal criteria. minimal criteria are established such that they can be accomplished in all career paths in every professional field. certain career paths and research areas do not allow the completion of these minimal criteria. in these cases the panels can disregard them based on merits and on the conceptual and well-documented considerations. meeting the minimal criteria is not a sufficient, but only a necessary condition for a positive decision. 5. different assessment metrics should be applied at different stages of the career path and for different research areas to reflect the diversity of researchers and to ensure equal opportunities in their academic progress. at the beginning of a researcher's career, e.g., citation rates are less relevant and research quality should rather be assessed by journal ratings. at a later stage of the research career (habilitation, professorship), scientific impact such as invited talks or citations should be considered. the primary measure of research quality should be based on a comprehensive analysis of the validity, the scientific value, the novelties, and the impact of the results. moreover, social impact and relevance for sustainable development goal(s) must also be integral parts of research quality assessment. 1 https://coara.eu/agreement/the-agreement-full-text/ 2 bme is committed to ensuring that the evaluation of research, researchers, and research organizations adopt to the diversity of practices and activities, and that help to improve the quality and impact of research. by joining coara, bme expressed its conviction that methodologies for measuring and evaluating scientific performance need to be reviewed both within bme and the wider scientific community. bme agrees with the following commitments proposed in the agreement, and is devoted to update its internal evaluation processes. coara reflection points bme actions reflect on your strategy and change involve bme’s scientific council to study approach existing bme practices. involve your institutional community in bme’s scientific council (sc) is a body that the change process represents bme’s wide scientific community. the sc will coordinate the coara action plan, issue recommendations, identify strategical directions, and publish these on bme’s web page, and present these towards bme’s top management. identify key challenges to address bme’s sc will overview existing practices and specify recommended changes, especially in the context of gender equality, early carrier research assessment, and the internationalization of the assessment process. recognize the diversity of contributions at bme all disciplines have equal to, and careers in, research in accordance opportunities in terms of accessing research with the needs and nature of the research funding. access to facilities and tools should be guaranteed for all members of bme’s research staff. bme consistently promotes equal opportunities without discrimination based on gender, career stage or research area. bme is currently in the process of transforming its structure and operation, as well as its legal status. in course of this transformation, special emphasis shall be placed on launching internal programs to support diverse career paths and ensuring 3 that younger and under-represented groups of researchers have fair development opportunities in the academic community. at bme, research contributions shall not be limited to traditional publications, and personal evaluations will equally include components such as recognizing all forms of research activities as well as public engagement and technology transfer. base research assessment primarily on bme’s current practices in promotion as well qualitative evaluation of which peer as job assignments are currently based on review is central, supported by peer review and a complex assessment. we responsible use of quantitative indicators shall enforce and sustain these good practices. abandon inappropriate uses in research currently, bme does not apply inappropriate assessment of journal- and publication- journal- and publication-based metrics in based metrics, in particular inappropriate research assessment. however, with the uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- advent of international rankings, we index experience the danger of a swift transition towards a purely metrics-based research assessment. bme will therefore strengthen non-metrics-based, but rather peer-review related components in its evaluation processes, raise awareness against this danger in its entire research community. recruiting principles shall be revised focusing on comprehensive research quality, instead of considering only quantitative factors, encouraging the consideration of a wide range of research results. bme shall also test alternative assessment formats such as narrative cv, competency-based cv, and evidence-based cv formats. avoid the use of rankings of research bme plans to open towards international job organisations in research assessment markets in coming years and establish a purely merit-based evaluation procedure. commit resources to reforming research the bme’s top management envisages a new assessment as is needed to achieve the operating model. in this new model, a new organisational changes committed to position of vice-rector for science has been created, and a scientific program office is 4 being established. these positions/resources shall support achieving bme’s coara goals. review and develop research assessment bme will lay down research assessment criteria, tools and processes principles. the rap will provide guidance and support to assessment committees and juries at bme. raise awareness of research assessment, the rap shall be disseminated within bme’s reform and provide transparent research community, and made public on communication, guidance, and training bme’s website. on assessment criteria and processes as well as their use exchange practices and experiences to as an active member of coara’s national enable mutual learning within and chapter, we shall share our best practices beyond the coalition within hungary as well as with our international partners. communicate progress made on bme’s commitment to open communication adherence to the principles and and collecting feedback is crucial for the implementation of the commitments success of the coara reform. therefore, elements contributing to the reform will be discussed and debated internally. the collected results will be presented to the academic community and feedback and suggestions will be requested. the approval of the reform will be carried out by academic bodies such as the university habilitation committee and doctorial council, and supported by bme’s scientific council. evaluate practices, criteria and tools in the previous period, bme’s scientific based on solid evidence and the state-of- council created a comprehensive "open the-art in research on research, and make science strategy". bme is committed to data openly available for evidence launch the actions highlighted in this gathering and research. document, and enforce its open data and open science policy in forthcoming years. 5 roadmap 2023-2027 2023 bme became an official signatory of the coara agreement 2024 the bme's designated representatives followed coara's online events and attended the general assembly. bme has prepared its coara action plan. 2025 finalizing and launching bme’s coara action plan. continuous improvement of bme procedures. active participation in national and international organizations, networks and working groups. launching bme’s open science plan. 2026 continuous improvement of bme procedures. active participation in national and international organizations, networks and working groups. assess and evaluate further development objectives. 2027 review of the bme coara action plan. 6
