university of bergamo coara action plan january 2025 1 1 - introduction on july 20, 2022, the agreement on reforming research assessment was published. this policy document defines a common direction for reforming research assessment practices. it emerged from an open consultation led by the european commission, involving various stakeholders, and was refined through a drafting process that included input from approximately 350 organizations in different roles. the agreement focuses on research assessment of (i) researchers, (ii) projects and (iii) research organizations. the underlying rationale is that assessments should recognize the diversity and plurality of research outputs, practices and activities that support high-quality research and maximize its impact. to this end, the agreement delineates four main principles/commitments, along with six additional "supporting" commitments. in 2023, the university of bergamo (unibg) signed the agreement formalizing its support for the principles. subsequently, unibg joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara), which comprises 716 member organizations from across the globe as of 10 january 2025. moreover, unibg was among the 45 italian institutions whose initiative led to the establishment of the italian national chapter in september 2023, which currently has 52 member institutions. 2 - the plan under the agreement on reforming research assessment, each signatory coara member organization is invited to elaborate and publicly share an action plan, delineating the actions that it will undertake over the following five years with the objective of implementing the “core commitments”. in response to this requirement, unibg has undertaken a comprehensive review of its own research assessment criteria, tools, and procedures. this analytical and reflective process has resulted in the formulation of an initial version of the action plan. this version delineates the specific actions that unibg is committed to implementing in the coming years. these actions are based on an in-depth analysis of the current state of research at unibg and have been developed with meticulous consideration of the challenges and constraints posed by the national context. unibg is committed to conducting regular monitoring of the implementation of its action plan and making revisions as necessary, based on the results and reflections that emerge from the ongoing monitoring activities. 3 - the process the formulation of the action plan encompassed a series of informational meetings with various internal stakeholders. these meetings had two objectives: to disseminate the vision, principles, and commitments of the agreement on reforming research assessment and to understand the availability of researchers and administrative and technical staff to participate in coara initiatives. moreover, the meeting provided a forum for the collection of suggestions and feedback regarding the action plan. the aforementioned process culminated in the drafting of the action plan, which has seen the active involvement of the following key actors: - the pro-rectorate for research (deputy rector for research and rector’s delegate for research evaluation and university ranking); - the directors of departments; - the research delegates of departments; - the quality assurance unit (pqa); - the office of bibliometrics, ranking, and open science. 2 4 - the actions the table shows the state of research evaluation at unibg and the actions planned to align with the core commitments of coara. commitment in the state of the art at unibg actions timeline agreement on reforming research assessment 1. recognise the diversity salary incremental procedure further expansion of the range of outcomes being considered of contributions to, and the recently modified system of regulation in the internal process of research evaluation by including a q2 2027 careers in, research in for awarding two-year economic measure of third mission activities, yet to be designed and accordance with the progressions defines an evaluation scheme constructed. needs and nature of that takes into account both research the research products (in line with the system used at the interest in considering ways to promote and include in the continuous university level to distribute research funds) research assessment (i) open access, (ii) peer review activities, over the 5-year and public engagement activities. (iii) supervision/mentorship activities (of graduate/phd period students/assistants), and (iv) any other activities that emerge internal research fund allocation from the discussion. in this sense, unibg will monitor the unibg uses two centralized models for activities of individual coara working groups (e.g. the one on allocating to the different departments (i) rewarding peer review) and of the italian national chapter. internal research funds and (ii) staffing points. each department, in its turn, establishes its own models for q3 2025 these models are based on an internal allocating resources to researchers. unibg objective in this research assessment (ira) carried annually. regard is to conduct a preliminary investigation with the aim of this already aligns, at least to some extent, encouraging, if feasible, the alignment of these models with with coara principles because it considers the central model and the principles set forth by coara. this more than just scientific publications. more process will be conducted in a manner that respects the specifically, it is generated an overall score autonomy of each department and the disciplinary based on different types of “research output”, specificities that characterize them. namely publications, external research funds obtained, patents, and third-party activities. 2. base research other distributed resources unibg plans to maintain its current approach, which relies on assessment primarily there are additional resources distributed to peer review by evaluation committees and is guided by continuous on qualitative departments/faculty members by the established criteria that are made public in advance. over the 5-year evaluation for which university through internal calls, such as period peer review is central, research fellowships and funding for visiting supported by periods (incoming and outgoing). these types responsible use of of resources are allocated on the basis of an quantitative indicators evaluation that is mainly qualitative and 3 related to the content of the specific research project submitted by the applicants. limitations of qualitative evaluation regarding the qualitative aspect of evaluation, it seems rather difficult to imagine using peer review in the context of ira. indeed, this assessment takes place annually and encompasses the evaluation of a large amount of research outputs. therefore, the implementation of a peer review process would be impractical, necessitating the pro bono involvement of a considerable number of external reviewers. 3. abandon inappropriate indices such as the jif and the h-index are promote discussion on the adoption of guidelines for hiring uses in research not currently used in the ira. in fact, apart committees to consider the extent to which they should adopt q3 2026 assessment of journal- from the potential limitations of such practices that emphasize the importance of valuing diversity and publication based indicators, the central research assessment in research contributions. metrics, in particular needs to be applicable to very different inappropriate uses of disciplinary fields, where certain indices may journal impact factor not be of primary importance. however, (jif) and h-index (as publications are classified according to the proxies for quality and type of product (journal article, book chapter, impact) monograph, etc.) and within certain types there are subcategories characterized by different scores, such as class a (asn) and/or indexed (scopus/wos) journals. 4. avoid the use of unibg adopts a critical stance towards no further action is expected rankings of research rankings. organisations in rankings are not used in research(er) research assessment assessment. 5. commit resources to unibg is member of the italian national creation of an ad hoc group responsible for implementing, reforming research chapter. monitoring, and updating the actions of the plan, also in q2 2025 assessment as is response to the outputs of the wg and the changing context. needed to achieve the the group will also be responsible of raising awareness of organisational research assessment reform. changes committed to 6. review and develop department research representatives and start a debate on the opportunity of including a broader research assessment heads of departments are continuously range of activities and outputs into the assessment procedure involved in the development and for the distribution of funds to and within departments, as well q4 2025 4 criteria, tools and implementation of evaluation policies and as for recruitment (e.g., (i) open access, (ii) peer review processes practices. activities, and (iii) supervision/mentorship activities (of graduate students/assistants). 7. raise awareness of organization of ad hoc courses, designed for a variety of research assessment audiences, with a particular focus on early-career continuous reform and provide researchers, to raise awareness of the principles of fair and over the 5-year transparent equitable peer review and the responsible use of quantitative period communication, indicators. guidance, and training on assessment criteria raise awareness of the university's research evaluation continuous and processes as well criteria and practices among members of the research over the 5-year as their use community through the intranet and research newsletter, by period organising dedicated meetings and by producing easily accessible materials. 8. exchange practices share knowledge and practices within the national chapter by continuous and experiences to participating in the organized meetings and initiatives. over the 5-year enable mutual learning period within and beyond the coalition 9. communicate all documents pertaining to the local research publishing the coara roadmap on public platforms. q1 2025 progress made on assessment process are accessible to adherence to the members of the academic community. monitoring the roadmap implementation and report continuous principles and periodically to the university governing body. over the 5-year implementation of the period commitments creation of a webpage dedicated to coara, through which regularly inform the research community at unibg about the q4 2025 action plan and its implementation and updates. 10. evaluate practices, it is expected that the evaluation processes will be subject to criteria and tools based continuous monitoring, with periodic re-evaluation. on solid evidence and continuous the state-of-the-art in this process will involve the following actors: the deputy over the 5-year research on research, rector for research and the rector’s delegate for research period and make data openly evaluation, the university commission for open access to available for evidence scientific literature, the pqa, the research delegates at the gathering and departments and the bibliometric ranking and open science research office. 5
