coara action plan 2024 – 2028 conference of deans of french schools of engineering (cdefi) introduction the conference of deans of french schools of engineering (cdefi) is a non-profit association of deans of french public and private schools of engineering and universities of technology authorised by the cti (a french accreditation agency) to deliver the french engineering degree. cdefi is the local, national and international political and public voice of around 200 french engineering schools and universities of technology. cdefi supports higher education and research by providing engineering schools with a variety of services such as advocacy, policy recommendations, and project management. cdefi actively promotes initiatives helping engineering schools to successfully achieve their mission of education, research and innovation and positively interact with the socio-economic world. cdefi is aware that research assessment is a key aspect of conducting research activities and building academic teams that bring value to students and society. cdefi joined the coara coalition with the objectives to contribute to the work of the coalition, to promote the coara objectives among its members and to support its members in implementing the research assessment principles of coara. not being a research operator on its own, cdefi plans to focus on a limited number of coara commitments that fall within the missions of cdefi. cdefi’s activities supporting the reform of research assessment the table resumes the actions envisaged by cdefi to contribute to the identified list of coara commitments. the action plan will be monitored by the cdefi board of directors (“commission permanente”). progress in the implementation will be reported to coara. the primary focus of cdefi will be on three points: • raising awareness of the necessity to reform research evaluation and the existing initiatives and best practices in the field; • support cedfi members in the implementation of new practices regarding research evaluation tailored to the specific situation and needs of members; • monitor evolution of research evaluation practices in the french engineering schools. 1 the following table outlines the way cdefi plans to contribute to appropriate coara commitments. coara commitments actions envisaged by cdefi 1. , 2. for which peer cdefi is not directly engaged in any research review is central, supported by responsible activity, research funding or research use of quantitative indicators. evaluation. however, promoting the coara commitments among cdefi members, 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research research stakeholders and policy makers as assessment of journal - and publication - well as to the greater public is within the scope based metrics, in particular inappropriate of cdefi actions. uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- index. 4. . 5. as is needed to achieve the not within cdefi scope organizational changes committed to. 6. review and develop research assessment not within cdefi scope criteria, tools, and processes. 7. raise awareness of research assessment cdefi plans to promote the coara principles reform and provide transparent and the outcome of coara working groups communication, guidance, and training on through the various means at hand for cdefi: assessment criteria and processes as well - monthly cdefi thematic commission as their use. meetings, namely “training, research & innovation commission” and “resources and staﬀ guidance commission”; - topical meetings open to all members (“réunions d’information 8. exchange practices and experiences to thématiques”); enable mutual learning within and beyond - internal temporary working groups on the coalition. specific topics open to interested members; - production of public reports and recommendations based on cdefi working group outcomes; 2 - contribution to events promoting engineering research and advocating reform of research assessment; - promote reforming research assessment through cdefi publications. cdefi operates a yearly survey of relevant indicators regarding the activity and results of the french engineering schools. cdefi 9. communicate progress made on publishes a yearly “panorama des écoles adherence to the principles and d’ingénieurs françaises” based on this data. implementation of the commitments. cdefi will work on integrating appropriate indicators regarding research assessment practice into the survey. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and state-of-the-art in research on research and make data not within cdefi scope openly available for evidence gathering and research. conference of deans of french schools of engineering (cdefi) www.cdefi.fr x: x.com/cdefi linkedin: www.linkedin.com/company/5323901 3
