coara action plan university of milano bicocca the policy has been approved by the research quality committe (presidio di qualità-ramo ricerca) on march 25th, 2024 2024 università degli studi di milano-bicocca introduction the university of milano-bicocca joined coara in november 2022. the coara roadmap was published in march 2024 and will last 5 years, with a review process to take place within the second year of its adoption. the roadmap was written according to the scheme provided by coara. for any information, write to the contact point: bonaria.biancu@unimib.it. reflect on your strategy and change approach since joining coara (november 2022), the university has initiated an internal reflection aimed at identifying, within the research evaluation processes and procedures, activities specifically subject to analysis and revision based on coara commitments. in particular, within the research quality committee (presidio di qualità-ramo ricerca or pqa-rr, the body responsible for planning and implementing research quality policies chaired by the vice-rector for research and composed of the research area manager and a faculty representative for each department), recruitment and internal funding mechanisms currently using researchers' scientific output as an evaluation criterion have been examined. it was decided, at least in the initial application of the coara roadmap, to intervene only in internal procedures, as they are the only ones directly and fully governable by the university. the pqa- rr has formulated some proposals which were then submitted to the academic senate. the senate, especially prompted by the representative of early career researchers, has proposed some modifications in response to the pqa-rr. finally, the pqa-rr has resolved to adopt two specific actions, intending to monitor and possibly review/integrate the actions within the first two years of the adoption of the roadmap. the actions concern the modification of the internal research fund (fondo di ateneo) allocation criteria, particularly the modification to the regulation as follows: action "incentivizing early career with qualitative evaluation and rewards for openness and sharing of results" mandates to increase the weight of products presented by early career researchers (rtd/rtt), regardless of their age, compared to those presented by associate professors, full professors, and indefinite-term university researchers, for the distribution of the departmental share of university research funding. action "publication of research data": the constraint of publishing research data in open access will be included for accessing the funding, for those disciplinary areas and types of data to which such publication is applicable; the term 'research data' is to be intended broadly and also includes software code developed by the project group. open access publication of research data may occur, if necessary, after a maximum embargo period of 36 months. the data will be made available through the institutional repository board (https://board.unimib.it/research-data/), or through disciplinary repositories that meet fair requirements. additionally, the next "starting grant" call must include the clause that publications resulting from the funding must be published in open access. the point regarding the attribution of salary increments is postponed to the next revision of the roadmap, as it implies regulatory changes not only internal to the university of milano-bicocca but also of national relevance. involve your institutional community in the change process the change actions were decided by the pqa-rr, chaired by the vice-rector for research, after consultation with the academic senate. the coara roadmap will be shared with the entire academic community through an email communication and publication on the university's website and/or 2 università degli studi di milano-bicocca intranet. identify key challenges to address the early career and the openness of research results have been identified as two domains in which the university intends to follow through on coara commitments. , the university will provide research funding only on the condition that output data are opened and shared in fair repositories. additionally, through a reward-based funding for young researchers, it aims at promoting research and professional growth of early career individuals in academia. the university does not use rankings to consider institutional partnerships. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to the university will use the research funds already normally provided but with the changes to the evaluation criteria indicated above. it is expected during the roadmap review phase that will take place by the end of 2026. the university plans to make available to hiring and promotion commissions the videoguides that will be produced by the coara wg on gender bias (wg "tier-towards an inclusive evaluation of research"). the changes to the regulations for the allocation of research funds will be made public on the university website and shared via email with the entire academic community. , the pqa-rr will annually monitor the results of changes in the funding allocation criteria. the coara roadmap for the university will be subject to a review within the second year of application (2026) 3 university of milano-bicocca piazza dell’ateneo nuovo, 1 - 20126 milano www.unimib.it
