berlin university alliance collaboration platform coara action plan version 1.0 (august 2024) contact: dr. sybille hinze center for open and responsible research, objective – advancing research quality and value berlin university alliance kleine präsidentenstraße 1 10178 berlin email: sybille.hinze@berlin-university-alliance.de gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) preamble the berlin university alliance collaboration platform (bua collaboration platform) joined the co- alition on advancing research assessment (coara) in april 2023. by joining coara, the bua collaboration platform commits itself to reviewing the criteria, instruments and processes of re- search assessment, aiming to implement practices that ensure that diverse types of research out- puts, practices and activities as well as different career paths, personal circumstances and frame- work conditions are taken into account when assessing the quality and impact of research. the bua collaboration platform, legally set up as a joint public corporation, is the management unit of the berlin university alliance, which is the alliance of the freie universität berlin, humboldt- universität zu berlin, technische universität berlin and charité - universitätsmedizin berlin (bua partners). the four partners joined forces to overcome institutional and disciplinary boundaries in order to create an integrated research environment and to turn berlin into one of the world's leading research hubs. the berlin university alliance is funded by the federal ministry of education and research (bmbf) and the state of berlin as part of the excellence strategy of the federal and state governments. while the collaboration platform does not perform research on its own, it coordinates, supports and facilitates activities within and across the bua partner organizations, i.e., its main functions are: • supporting excellent researchers beyond institutional boundaries and • sharing resources and providing new joint services within the alliance. the berlin university alliance pursues these tasks along five objectives (fo- cusing on grand challenges, fostering knowledge exchange, advancing research quality and value, promoting talent and sharing resources) and 3 cross cutting themes (diversity and gen- der equality, teaching and learning an internationalization). the subjects of the bua's evaluation processes are therefore in particular the selection procedures for projects and individuals to be funded by the bua as well as their performance monitoring and evaluation during and after the funding. decisions regarding the assessment processes within the bua partners are and remain within their autonomy. yet, the vision and overarching aim of the alliance is to turn berlin into an integrated research environment by facilitating research collabora- tion, career development and knowledge exchange across the traditional boundaries of personal networks, institutions and disciplines. consequently, assessment processes should be based on a shared understanding of values, compatible processes, procedures, and criteria. the bua collab- oration platform facilitates their formation and contributes to creating a common understanding and orientation on current developments and principles of research assessment. in its effort to fulfill the commitments outlined in this agreement, the bua collaboration platform has developed the following action plan to guide its activities related to research assessment. 2 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) commitment scope action responsibility time frame 1. recognise the diversity a) internal bua collabora- review selection, monitor- bua management (overall), status: ongoing of contributions to, and tion platform (bua colpf) ing and assessment pro- center for open and re- review of existing guidelines / careers in, research in ac- processes, i.e., measure cesses and criteria in place. sponsible research (core) sops to be finalized by end cordance with the needs and project selection, identify and implement se- in collaboration with bua 2024 and nature of the re- monitoring and assess- lection, monitoring and as- quality management unit draft for adjusted / new pro- search ment sessment processes and cri- (qmu) (operational) cesses and criteria by mid- teria to accommodate diver- 2025 sity of and within bua activi- continuous reflection in the ties. context of new selection pro- cesses and annual review b) with relevance for bua while decisions regarding bua objective 3 (advancing status: ongoing, to be contin- partner organizations the assessment processes research quality and ued for the term of bua and criteria applied within value) the bua partners are within their autonomy, bua colpf contributes to develop a shared understanding of val- ues, compatible processes, procedures, and criteria (see commitment 5). 2. base research assess- a) internal bua colpf pro- bua colpf project selection bua management (overall) status: ongoing ment primarily on quali- cesses, i.e., measure and processes have been based center for open and re- review to be finalized by end tative evaluation for project selection, moni- on peer review from the be- sponsible research (core) 2024 which peer review is cen- toring and assessment ginning and will continue to in collaboration with bua draft for new guidelines / tral, supported by re- do so. quantitative indica- quality management unit sops by mid-2025 sponsible use of quanti- tors are used very selec- (qmu) (operational) continuous reflection in the tative indicators tively. still, guidelines and context of new assessment sops outlining the selection, and selection processes and monitoring and assessment annual review principles will be reviewed 3 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) and revised (where needed) in line with the principle. b) with relevance for bua implementing guidelines bua objective 3 (advancing concept for trainings on peer partner organizations and sops will be comple- research quality and review by end 2024 mented by building up value) knowledge and skills about peer review processes. 3. abandon inappropriate a) internal bua colpf pro- within bua funding lines bua management (overall) status: ongoing uses in research assess- cesses, i.e., measure and provision of publication- center for open and re- review to be finalized by end ment of journal- and project selection, moni- based metrics (jif and / or h- sponsible research (core) 2024 publication-based met- toring and assessment index) is not required, these in collaboration with bua draft for adjusted / new pro- rics, in particular inap- indices are not considered in quality management unit cesses and criteria by mid- propriate uses of journal selection processes. still, to (qmu) (operational) 2025 impact factor (jif) and h- clarify refraining from using continuous reflection in the index these indicators, guidelines context of new assessment and sops will be reviewed, and selection processes and revised and communicated. annual review status: ongo- ing, to be continued for the term of bua b) with relevance for bua while the decision on as- core partner organizations sessment processes per- formed within the bua part- ners remain within their au- tonomy, the bua contrib- utes to continuously engag- ing with relevant stakehold- ers within bua organizations and beyond in order to ad- vocate responsible use of adequate indicators. in par- ticular, core engages in provision of education of 4 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) training about adequate use of quantitative indicators in particular as an active mem- ber of the consortium run- ning the european summer school for scientometrics (esss) which provides train- ing and state-of the art sci- entometric methods, proce- dures, indicators. 4. avoid the use of rankings a) internal bua colpf pro- bua colpf itself is not a re- of research organisations cesses search organization and in research assessment thus, rankings are not rele- vant at this level. b) with relevance for bua bua continuously engages core status: ongoing, to be contin- partner organizations with all stakeholders within ued for the term of bua bua organizations and be- yond, in particular by offer- ing training about adequate use of quantitative indica- tors (see also above engage- ment in esss). 5. commit resources to re- for bua, ensuring research bua objective 3 status: ongoing, to be contin- forming research assess- quality is both an institu- ued for the term of bua ment as is needed to tional goal and a field of re- achieve the organiza- search. while developing as- tional changes commit- sessment processes per- ted to formed within the bua part- ners remain within their au- tonomy, bua supports pro- jects and activities that fur- 5 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) ther develop existing scien- tific expertise on relevant aspects of scientific perfor- mance, research quality and their assessment leading to adapt procedures imple- mented by the bua ad their partner organizations. a) internal bua colpf pro- establishment of organiza- status: relevant units (core cesses tional unit and structures fo- and qmu) established and op- cusing on research monitor- erational, ongoing, to be con- ing and assessment. tinued for the term of bua b) with relevance for bua provision of support partner organizations measures with relevance for status: ongoing, to be contin- organization-specific reform ued for the term of bua initiatives. 6. review and develop re- a) internal bua colpf pro- advocating transparent, ap- bua objective 3 status: ongoing, to be contin- search assessment crite- cesses & b) with rele- propriate and progressive ued for the term of bua ria, tools and processes vance for bua partner or- evaluation of individual re- ganizations searchers and research teams in line with interna- tional initiatives is part of the recently released bua mission statement on open science. in addition, as stated above (commitment 5) bua supports projects and activities to develop sci- entific expertise on relevant aspects of scientific perfor- mance, research quality and 6 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) their assessment which will be taken into account when adapting procedures within the bua partner organiza- tions. however, decisions re- garding assessment pro- cesses performed within the bua partners remain within their autonomy. 7. raise awareness of re- continuously engage within core & qmu status: ongoing, to be contin- search assessment re- and beyond bua with the ued for the term of bua form and provide trans- scientific community and parent communication, discusses the need for and guidance, and training on the effects of responsible re- assessment criteria and search assessment. consult processes as well as their with the units in charge of use project selection about pro- cesses in place and criteria applied. use existing and set up new communication channels to inform about processes and criteria ap- plied, e.g., use bua newslet- ter and develop dedicated webpage. implement rele- vant content in educational and training modules, e.g., the bua-module research quality and open science. 8. exchange practices and share knowledge and expe- core status: ongoing, to be contin- experiences to enable riences among the bua part- ued for the term of bua mutual learning within ners in an organized man- and beyond the coalition ner, actively contribute to 7 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) coara, e.g., in relevant working group(s) and the national chapter germany. 9. communicate progress communicate the state of core status: ongoing, to be contin- made on adherence to play of changes and their ued for the term of bua, the principles and imple- implementation of the launch website by end of 2024 mentation of the com- agreement on reforming mitments research assessment, i.e., report regularly to the bua governing bodies (bord of directors, executive board), bua management, steering committees, management units. facilitate exchange with stakeholders in the house responsible for en- gaging with the coara com- mitments and use the com- munication of the progress as a guiding example. inform the broader scientific com- munity (bua partner organi- zations and beyond) through dedicated webpage and bua newsletter. 10. evaluate practices, crite- for bua, ensuring research core status: ongoing, to be contin- ria and tools based on quality is both an institu- ued for the term of bua solid evidence and the tional goal and a field of re- state-of-the-art in re- search. bua supports pro- search on research, and jects and activities that fur- make data openly availa- ther develop existing scien- ble for evidence gather- tific expertise on relevant ing and research 8 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern berlin university alliance collaboration platform - coara action plan - version 1.0 (august 2024) aspects of scientific perfor- mance, research quality and their assessment leading to adapt procedures imple- mented by the bua partner organizations. make re- search results publicly avail- able – funding provided from bua already requests oa publishing of research results. 9 gefördert im rahmen der exzellenzstrategie von bund und ländern
