november 2024 coara action plan of aquas 2024-2027 the agency for health quality and assessment of catalonia (aquas) is a public entity of the catalan health ministry of the government of catalonia acting for public policies. its mission is to generate relevant knowledge by evaluating and analysing data for decision-making in order to improve the health of citizens and the sustainability of the catalan health care system. aquas is a founding member of the international network of agencies of health technology assessment (inahta) and the international school on research impact assessment (isria), it is a corporative member of health technology assessment international (htai), of the ci-ber group (networked biomedical research centers) in epidemiology and public health, and of redissec (spanish research network on health services in chronic diseases), and of ricapps (research network in chronicity, primary care and health promotion), as well as an associated unit of the ingenio (csic-upv) research centre. aquas was awarded with the josep trueta's medal for its health merits by the government of catalonia. it is recommended that this document be cited as follows: agency of health quality and assessment of catalonia. coara action plan 2024-2027.2024. those interested in this document can contact: agency of health quality and assessment of catalonia. carrer aragó, 330-332 (second floor). 08009 barcelona tel.: 93 551 3888 | fax: 93 551 7510 | http://aquas.gencat.cat © 2024, generalitat de catalunya. agency of health quality and assessment of catalonia edits: agency of health quality and assessment of catalonia first edition: barcelona, november 2024 correction: agency of health quality and assessment of catalonia the contents of this work are subject to a license of attribution-noncommercial-noderivatives 4.0 international.: the license can be consulted at creative commons 2 índex introduction ........................................................................................................................... 4 aquas’ research evaluation context ................................................................................... 5 action plan 2024-2027 ........................................................................................................ 10 3 introduction the agency for health quality and assessment of catalonia (aquas) is a public agency of the department of health of the catalan government. aquas aims to generate relevant knowledge to enhance the quality, safety, and sustainability of catalonia's health system, and to support decision-making for citizens, health professionals, managers, and health planning authorities. biomedical, clinical, and health services research play an important role in transforming the health system. one of aquas’s main tasks is to promote impactful health research by providing tools for evaluating, analysing, anticipating outcomes, informing decisions in policy and scientific planning. the research lab of aquas is responsible for the evaluation of research programmes, research centres and research ecosystems. its focus is on health research and biomedicine, although most of the work being done has been “exported” and adapted to other disciplines. in december 2022, aquas formally signed the agreement on reforming research assessment and joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara), under the leadership of the research lab but with the subsequent approval from its executive direction. this endorsement involves the formulation of an action plan for the progressive reform of internal research assessment systems, a commitment to be completed within five years (december 2027). moreover, in april 2023, aquas supported the creation of the coara spanish national chapter, and is committed to participate actively in its activities. this document defines the coara action plan 2024-27 for aquas. this action plan is crafted with the objective of integrating coara commitments into as many aquas research assessment policies and practices as possible. this first version ot the action plan has been drafted by the research lab of aquas and is a living document that will be updated regularly. it outlines what aquas is currently doing regarding the coara commitments, as well as its objectives and plans for 2024-2027. 4 aquas’ research evaluation context aquas is an organization with a historical commitment for exploring the principles of responsible research assessment, aiming to ensure research excellence and social research impact through its evaluation practices. aquas believes that impactful research drives positive transformation across the healthcare ecosystem. recognizing the need for a global dialogue on effective ways to carry research impact assessment, aquas co-founded the international school on research impact assessment (isria) in 2013.this initiative has equipped over 450 professionals from 34 countries with the skills to assess the impact of research investments, fostering a global dialogue on how research can best serve society. in 2018, aquas developed the health research evaluation framework (saris framework) that sets the main axis to evaluate in a responsible way the research promoted and funded by the department of health of the catalan government with the objective to adopt an assessment that while ensuring excellence, contributes to optimize impact of research by adopting an approach of continuous learning and improvement. guided by the axis of the saris framework, aquas’s evaluations efforts focus on accountability, comprehensive analysis, and stakeholder engagement. these evaluations encompass research calls, performance of research institutes in health and biomedical research co-participated by the catalan government and broader aspects of the catalan health and biomedical research ecosystem (ex: women leadership in health research). aquas assessments goes beyond a tradional evaluation metrics to a model that integrates principles of responsible research assessment and co-responsibility for generating research impact. it aligns with global initiatives like the coara coalition, dora declaration, leiden manifesto, isria statement or the unesco definition of open science, advocating for open, diverse, and impactful scientific evaluation. 5 figure 1:the saris framework (aquas, 2018) aquas is responsible for various research assessment activities, each with its own processes and tools:  evaluation of health research calls. aquas evaluates various competitive calls in health research commissioned by different funders. these calls have diverse objectives and beneficiaries, ranging from funding individuals, research groups, projects, or institutions. the evaluation process starts with a needs assessment to help funders to shape the design of these calls. the ex-ante evaluation process involves allocating resources competitively based on predefined criteria and methods co-created with the funding agencies. during interim evaluation, aquas supports beneficiaries in achieving objectives beyond mere compliance monitoring. this approach moves away from “fund and forget” model and fosters shared responsibility. aquas periodically organizes activities designed to build the capacity of the grant beneficiaries to enabling the research achieve a greater 6 impact. at the end of the evaluation cycle, an impact evaluation is performed. impact evaluation includes accountability and analysis to demonstrate citizens and other stakeholders the social value of funding health research. the evaluation timelines align with program designs, focusing on either short-term outcomes or longer-term impacts.with this cycle, aquas ensures that research quality is guaranteed while maximizing its impact on the healthcare system and returning scientific knowledge to society. figure 2: stages of aquas evaluation process for research calls  evaluation of health research centres. since 2014, aquas has published every two- years indicators of research process achieved by health and biomedical research centres in catalonia, including the hospital-based research institutes. the objective is to inform policy- makers about research investments, enable comparisons and benchmarking of results, identify opportunities for improvement, and help the government make evidence-based policy decisions. this exercise ensures transparency and accountability in the use of r&d resources in the catalan health system.  evaluation of the sex/gender perspective and gender equality. the hypathia community of practice (hypathia cop) is a community of practice of research centres in catalonia coordinated by aquas focused on advancing gender equality in health research. founded on 2021, it promotes mutual learning and knowledge exchange through activities like best practice sessions, workshops, and webinars. the community adheres to the hypathia of alexandria charter, which emphasizes renovating policies, integrating gender perspectives in research, fostering women's career advancement, and removing unconscious biases. key initiatives include developing a toolkit for incorporating sex and gender perspectives in research, training on implicit bias, creating inclusive language 7 guidelines, addressing resistances to structural change, and promoting women's advancement and leadership. additionally, the hypathia cop has organized gender summits to stimulate progress through self-assessment and reflection.  research on research to support health research planning. the saris monographs provide critical insights into current health research issues, offering analysis for decision- makers, professionals, and the public. these monographs serve as a reflection tool, guiding evidence-based decisions in science policy. they are organized into three series: responsible research, which addresses topics like gender equality and research engagement; research that transforms, showcasing successful research cases with societal impact; and research priorities, focusing on the analysis of research portfolios. these publications enable continuous improvement in research planning and emphasize the transformative power of well-targeted research. here is a table summarizing the saris monographs: table 1: saris monographs no title year series 9 the value of promoting nursing research: 30 impact 2024 research that transforms cases from peris 2017-2021 8 actions to raise awareness about gender perspective in 2023 responsible research. gender research content 7 women's advancement and leadership in the biomedical 2020 responsible research. gender research centers of catalonia ii 6 women's advancement and leadership in the biomedical 2020 responsible research. gender research centers of catalonia 5 exploratory study of the impact of research at the vall 2019 research that transforms d'hebron university hospital 4 how did the first nursing experience: impact analysis of 2018 research that transforms peris 2017 nursing research call 3 participation in research: why and how. 2019 responsible research. engagement 2 are we ready for citizen participation in health research? 2018 responsible research. engagement 1 how to measure the participation in health research of 2018 responsible research. the actors of the system? literature review engagement  building capacities, discussion and community within the catalan research ecosystem. transformative science tuesdays is a bi-monthly series of sessions launched in october 2023 through a collaboration between aquas, ingenio (csic-upv), and cwts: it brings together research managers, policymakers, researchers, and other 8 stakeholders to discuss topics such as research assessment reform, open science, and research impact, encouraging diverse perspectives and active engagement. each session features diverse speakers and active participant engagement, promoting mutual learning and reflection. another key initiative are the saris sessions, they provide training across the research calls lifecycle, focusing on impact literacy and open science principles like gender equality, open access, and research impact. using a formative evaluation model, they offer real-time impact evaluation tools to encourage forward-looking actions and shared responsibility in maximizing research impact. together, these initiatives foster dialogue among researchers, share best practices, and strengthen the research ecosystem in catalonia by promoting critical reflections on inclusive and impactful research practices.  9 action plan 2024-2027 aquas is embedding coara commitments into its research assessment policies and procedures. over the past years, aquas has been already working on improving its research assessment procedures towards a responsible research assessment, aligning our work with the principles of open science, dora or the leiden manifesto that have influenced us significantly. the coara action plan 2024-2027 is structured around five strategic action lines that guide the implementation in aquas of coara commitments. these actions aim to foster a more inclusive, responsible, and impactful research assessment ecosystem within catalonia's health research landscape: 1. expanding evaluation criteria and methodologies (l1). this line focuses on refining aquas’s assessment frameworks to recognize a broader array of research contributions and career trajectories, moving beyond traditional metrics and adopting qualitative indicators to provide a more holistic evaluation of research and research impact. 2. stakeholder training and support (l2). aquas is committed to building the capacities of researchers, reviewers, and other research stakeholders by offering training and guidance that emphasize qualitative assessment approaches and the principles of responsible research evaluation and open science. 3. dissemination, knowledge exchange and community building (l3). this action line encompass active engagement with local, national, and international peers, including coara's community. it involves organizing sessions is aquas context to discuss advancements and best practices in research assesment as well as building connections with other entities to exchange experiences and promote mutual learning. 4. promoting cultural and institutionall change (l4). aquas aims to participate in discussions to promote the cultural shift within the research community by engaging stakeholders in strategic discussions. it will also using internal resources like saris monographs to highlight responsible research assessment and advocate for systemic change. 5. evaluation, and continuous improvement (l5). this line ensures ongoing progress through evidence-based evaluation of implemented actions, regular reviews of the action plan, and open channels for feedback to maintain alignment with best practices and evolving needs. 10 current achievements (september 2024) coara strategic line action description commitment l1: expanding research calls: aquas does not use publication-based research calls: keep exploring opportunities to recognize a quantitative metrics as the central element to evaluate the broader range of research contributions (e.g., interdisciplinary evaluation scientific quality of call applications. instead, we use a qualitative work, community engagement, impact beyond academia…) criteria and peer-review approach as the central element of our review research calls, with a focus on iterative process improvement methodologies processes. all assessment processes of research calls are based and continue exploring narrative cvs where relevant. on a two-step methodology. first, there is a per-review remote evaluation (with an assessment toolkit) and second there is a engage reviewers and research beneficiaries in a feedback loop of 'learning and improving' cycles to refine processes 1. recognize the panel discussion. based on the outcomes of each call. diversity of contributions we have established processes to ensure a balanced composition to, and careers in, of peer-reviewer panels, considering diverse skills, experience, research in accordance knowledge across disciplines, age and gender representation. with the needs and promote the benefits of involving health professionals, like nature of the research for a selected group of talent calls, the standardized cvna is no nurses and primary care physicians, in research by conducting longer required. instead, the application form includes sections research impact assessment exercices that demonstrate how where applicants can provide a narrative description of their their research contributes to enhancing and transforming the career trajectories, offering a more comprehensive view beyond healthcare system, broadening the scope of evaluation quantitative indicators. additionally, in certain assessments, methodologies to include diverse research profiles. applicants have the option to submit both their standardized cvn and a narrative description of their scientific trajectories. research centres: aquas abandoned the journal impact factor 2. base research (jif) and the h-index as metrics for the scientific contributions of research centres: explore the feasibility of introducing assessment primarily on the centres many years ago. to characterise research centres qualitative indicators and the responsible use of quantitative qualitative evaluation for aquas uses quantitative indicators related to publications, indicators, to more comprehensively characterize their research which peer review is funding, research transfer (such as patents, spin-offs, clinical contributions. central, supported by trials, or clinical practice guidelines), and human resources, which responsible use of also includes gender equity data. quantitative indicators l2: stakeholder develop and disseminate examples for researchers and we have presented coara to our decision-makers to raise potential grantees, drawing on our impact studies and other training and awareness about changes in the research system, in order to 1. recognize the international impact studies, to illustrate diverse research diversity of contributions support improve future calls. contributions, career trajectories, outputs, outcomes, and to, and careers in, we have conducted online sessions with call beneficiaries during impacts. research in accordance project implementation to support gender perspective in research provide training sessions to call beneficiaries during project with the needs and and fair data practices. implementation on impact roadmaps to maximize the nature of the research effectiveness of research impact grants, while fostering shared a the cvn is a digital standarized and unique cv for spanish researchers promoted by la fundación española para la ciencia y la tecnología 11 current achievements (september 2024) coara strategic line action description commitment we have conducted sessions with all reviewers of our calls responsibility in addressing current social needs. additionally, aiming to improve qualitative assessments and responsible support the development of a network and community among methods, reducing peer-review bias, the balanced use of grantees to encourage collaboration and knowledge exchange. quantitative metrics or integrating gender perspectives to enhance responsible evaluation culture. 2. base research assessment primarily on develope internal capacity to deliver training sessions to qualitative evaluation for applicants on how to craft narrative cvs that facilitate a more which peer review is qualitative evaluation process, emphasizing the more diverse central, supported by set of research contributions and career paths. responsible use of quantitative indicators provide guidance sessions and support to remote reviewers 7. raise awareness of and panellists for adapting to a high quality qualitative research assessment assessment approach. offer guidelines to evaluators tailored to reform and provide the specific content and objectives of each call, emphasizing transparent bias mitigation, responsible evaluation practices, and aquas's communication, vision on research evaluation.these resources will be made guidance, and training on available on the aquas website alongside other materials assessment criteria and related to research assessment reform and the coara processes as well as agenda. their use l3: we promoted coara principles internally in the whole participate in the spanish national chapter of coara dissemination, organisation of aquas. we conducted an internal session for staff to ensure a thorough understanding of coara principles. activities, to exchange practices and experiences for mutual knowledge learning. exchange and we engaged the aquas executive committee in discussions to community integrate coara principles into our policies and procedures. 8. exchange practices building we have fostered reflection on the advancement on research and experiences to explore opportunities to join coara working groups to deepen assessment practices through a session in autumn 2023 as part of enable mutual learning engagement and exchange practices. the transformative science tuesdays. this community debate, within and beyond the co-organized by aquas, shares content and best practices, coalition encouraging critical thinking on science and research, with active participation from the research community. explore other alliances beyond coara members, fostering exchange and mutual learning. 12 current achievements (september 2024) coara strategic line action description commitment promote coara principles advancement by hosting a follow- up session of transformative science tuesdays, inviting all entities in catalonia that have published a coara action plan, as well as other signatories and non-signatories, to collectively review progress and discuss joint advancements in research assessment practices. l4: promoting we have actively supported the catalan government in advancing research impact assessment at systemic level, and promoting raise awaraness towards responsible assessment by using 7. raise awareness of cultural and research assessment gender equality in catalan research. our contributions also our saris monographs and sessions and highlight the social institutional include strategic policy development through advisory roles and reform and provide impact of research within the catalan research ecosystem. change collaborative engagement with key stakeholders. transparent communication, keep actively engaging with relevant decision-making guidance, and training on stakeholders, to develop and promote policies that drive training on assessment cultural change. this includes enhancing impact research criteria and processes as culture through systemic research impact assessment well as their use exercices, training and capacity building initiatives. 1. recognize the support systemic change by advocating for gender equity in diversity of contributions research leadership and research practices throught the to, and careers in, actions of the hypathia cop. ensure that a member of the research lab is actively involved in coara activities and in the implementation of the current action plan with a reasonable allocation of time to these tasks. 5. as is needed allocate necessary resources to support the implementation of to achieve the changes, including the creation of guidance documents, organisational changes delivery of stakeholder training, and organization of meetings committed to and activities that foster cultural and organizational shifts in research assessment. 13 current achievements (september 2024) coara strategic line action description commitment l5: evaluation, implement an annual review and revision process for the action 9. communicate and continuous plan to ensure it remains current and effective. aquas will progress made on improvement regularly communicate updates on the implementation of adherence to the coara commitments through reports and other public principles and channels. implementation of the commitments 14 * https://aquas.gencat.cat @aquascat aquas-salut @aquasgencatsalut **
