crac-vitae reforming research assessment – a three year coara action plan – 2024 - 2026 introduction to vitae who we are the careers research and advisory centre (crac) is an independent and trusted provider of expertise on all aspects of careers in research. crac manages vitae, a not-for-profit programme and sector leader in the professional and career development of researchers. crac-vitae has expertise in career tracking, research culture and researcher development and regularly leads large research projects, commissions and consultations in these areas. we developed the researcher development framework (rdf), an internationally recognised professional development tool that describes the knowledge, behaviour and attributes of successful researchers. we also developed the research culture framework, which maps out the behaviours and values required for open, inclusive, and supportive working environments. our vision careers in research—across all sectors—are open, rewarding, and inclusive. why this matters when all individuals are included and supported to succeed in their careers, research becomes more innovative, creative, and impactful. our role • an independent and trusted provider of evidence on all aspects of careers in research. • an advocate for the conditions that enable individuals to succeed in their careers in research, in any sector. 1 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited • a convenor, community builder, and collaborator, working in partnership with the sector to ensure that professional and career development is inclusive, relevant, and meaningful for all those involved in research. our values • inclusive • collaborative • informed by evidence • act with integrity creating our action plan we have considered our action plan against all ten of the coara core commitments, however, it is clear that as we are not strictly a research performing organisation that certain commitments are more appropriate than others. whilst we uphold all of the commitments and are committed to sharing knowledge, practice and expertise with our network and community, we are able to be more active in those commitments that support researchers and researcher development. we have therefore chosen to focus on commitments 5, 7, 8 and 9 as these are most aligned with our core researcher development and research culture frameworks. we have developed our action plan from a number of perspectives, as an employer, on behalf of the vitae community and the wider research ecosystem and environment. the action plan by commitments 1 recognise the diversity of contributions to, it is important to note that vitae as an organisation does not and careers in accordance with the needs directly conduct any form of research assessment and nature of the needs and nature of the processes. research 2 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited purpose: this commitment will broaden we will adhere to the following principles in line with the core recognition of the diverse practices, activities commitments of the coara agreement. we will: and careers in research, considering the • encourage members and our community to consider specific nature of research disciplines and reforming research assessment at vitae events other research endeavours • support efforts to raise the profile of non-traditional • how does your organisation plan to outputs through involvement in the hidden ref. enable recognition of more diverse • engage in discussions around the evolution of the contributions to research? ref 2029 • how does your organisation plan to enable greater diversity in career • advocate for responsible transparent and sustainable paths and profiles? assessment practices to our stakeholders and community. • raise support for and build awareness of all coara initiatives. 2 base research assessment primarily on it is important to note that vitae as an organisation does not qualitative evaluation for which peer review is directly conduct any form of research assessment central, supported by responsible use of processes. quantitative indicators we will adhere to the following principles in line with the core purpose: this commitment will enable the commitments of the coara agreement. we will: move towards research assessment criteria • encourage members and our community to consider that focus primarily on quality, while reforming research assessment at vitae events recognising that responsible use of quantitative indicators can support • support efforts to raise the profile of non-traditional assessment where meaningful and relevant, outputs through involvement in the hidden ref. which is context dependent. • engage in discussions around the evolution of the ref 2029 3 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited • how does your organisation plan to • advocate for responsible transparent and sustainable actively engage in and learn from assessment practices to our stakeholders and research on research work? community. • how does your organisation plan to • raise support for and build awareness of all coara accommodate qualitative evaluation initiatives. mechanisms and base the use of metrics in a way that is aligned with your organisations value system? 3 abandon inappropriate uses in research it is important to note that vitae as an organisation does not assessment or journal and publication based directly conduct any form of research assessment metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of processes. journal impact factor and h-index we will adhere to the following principles in line with the core purpose: this commitment will reduce the commitments of the coara agreement. we will: dominance of a narrow set of quantitative • encourage members and our community to consider journal- and publication-based metrics. reforming research assessment at vitae events • how does your organisation plan to • support efforts to raise the profile of non-traditional actively engage in and learn from outputs through involvement in the hidden ref. research on research work? • engage in discussions around the evolution of the • how does your organisation plan to ref 2029 accommodate qualitative evaluation mechanisms and base the use of • advocate for responsible transparent and sustainable metrics in a way that is aligned with assessment practices to our stakeholders and your organisations value system? community. • raise support for and build awareness of all coara initiatives. 4 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited 4 avoid the use of rankings in research it is important to note that vitae as an organisation does not organisations in research assessment directly conduct any form of research assessment processes. purpose: this commitment will help avoid that metrics used by international rankings, we will adhere to the following principles in line with the core which are inappropriate for assessing commitments of the coara agreement. we will: researchers, trickle down to research and • encourage members and our community to consider researcher assessment. it will help the reforming research assessment at vitae events research community and research organisations regain the autonomy to shape • support efforts to raise the profile of non-traditional assessment practices, rather than having to outputs through involvement in the hidden ref. abide by criteria and methodologies set by • engage in discussions around the evolution of the external commercial companies. this could ref 2029 include retaining control over ranking • advocate for responsible transparent and sustainable methodologies and data. assessment practices to our stakeholders and community. • how does your organisation plan to • raise support for and build awareness of all coara mitigate reliance on organisation initiatives. rankings? 5 commit resources to reforming vitae to co-chair coara the working group on early 2024 – 2025 research assessment as is needed to and mid career researchers. this working group achieve the organisational changes focusses on understanding practice for early career committed to: researchers across europe and highlights the main challenges and issues for this particular cohort. it will purpose: this commitment will ensure also act as a test group for other working groups and that organisations allocate the necessary initiatives. resources, whether in the form of budget or staff capacity, to improve research vitae are part of the coara boost programme which acts as secretariat as part of wp4 support for working 5 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited assessment practices within their agreed groups. . vitae particularly support the tier working 2024 - 2026 timeframe. group that considers gender bias in research assessment and the working group we also chair on • which resources will your early and mid career researchers. institution allocate to the implementation of the research vitae are committed to the uk national chapter of assessment reform? (capacity or coara and considering research assessment reform budget) 2024 - ongoing from a national perspective through ongoing discussion and collaboration. 6 review and develop research assessment it is important to note that vitae as an organisation does not criteria, tools and processes directly conduct any form of research assessment processes. purpose: this commitment will ensure that national / regional / organisational authorities we will adhere to the following principles in line with the core and evaluation agencies review and, where commitments of the coara agreement. we will: needed, develop criteria for the assessment • encourage members and our community to consider of research performing units and reforming research assessment at vitae events organisations, in accordance with the principles. it will foster the responsible use of • support efforts to raise the profile of non-traditional metrics in assessing research performing outputs through involvement in the hidden ref. units and organisations, and help to prevent • engage in discussions around the evolution of the contradictions or incompatibilities between ref 2029 the assessment of research, researchers and • advocate for responsible transparent and sustainable research performing organisations. it will also assessment practices to our stakeholders and community. safeguard the interoperability of adapted or • raise support for and build awareness of all coara newly developed assessment processes. initiatives. 6 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited • does your organisation plan to pilot or implement alternative new assessment criteria, tools and processes (eg. narrative cv, competency based cv, evidenced based cv format, diversification of research careers and associated career progression) 7 raise awareness of research vitae are committed to informing our member network 2024 – 2026 assessment reform and provide through our member newsletter vitae news (approx. transparent communication, guidance 20,000 subscribers) and social media activity of relevant and training on assessment criteria and updates from coara. processes as well as their use vitae are committed to reflecting coara changes in 2024 - 2026 purpose: this commitment will ensure their international conference programme and other that organisations raise awareness of the policy events where appropriate. reform among all actors. it will ensure that organisations transparently communicate the criteria, tools and vitae have considered reform in research assessment 2024 - 2026 processes used for research assessment as part of their researcher development framework and train researchers and assessors in refresh and the framework has been revised in their use. accordance. this will be further communicated and disseminated in our future work. • does your institution plan to provide training guidance and support to assessment panels committees and juries? 7 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited 8 exchange practices and experiences to vitae have created a community which looks to improve 2024 – 2026 enable mutual learning within and beyond the career and professional development of the coalition researchers. we are committed to drawing on this community to highlight and share practice in research purpose: this commitment will ensure assessment. this will be reflected in our member organisations exchange and make use of events as required. information for mutual learning. it will help avoid fragmentation, contribute to vitae will continue to advocate for assessment practices 2024 - 2026 the coherence of assessment practices that are responsible, transparent and sustainable between organisations, and enable through our events and member networks. researcher mobility. it also will allow those further ahead to share approaches and lessons learned, to benefit those who have further to go on their reform journey • how does your organisation plan to exchange practices and foster exchanges of good practices in national and international contexts? 9 communicate progress made on vitae are committed to an annual review and short 2024 – 2026 adherence to the principles and report on their progress against the coara action plan. implementation of the commitments this will be reflected in our annual report with action plans required as necessary. purpose: this commitment will ensure organisations update one another on the vitae are committed to contributing to key discussions progress made. it will foster careful self- including coara general assembly, national chapter reflection and monitoring of their own and working group leaders meetings. 2024 – 2026 8 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited adherence to the principles and progress vitae are committed to maintaining an ongoing dialogue towards meeting the commitments. with all relevant stakeholders regarding the research 2024 – 2026 assessment reform process. • how will your organisation ensure the transparent communication of the organisations research evaluation processes within and outside of the organisation? 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools vitae are a work package leader in the opus project 2024 – 2025 based on solid evidence and the state of which has developed a framework of indicators and the art in research on research and make interventions linking researcher assessment to open data openly available for evidence science. in the final year of the project we will continue gathering and research to finalise this framework based on feedback and ensure that it is both comprehensive and accessible. a purpose: this commitment will ensure number of dissemination and communication activities that assessment approach decisions are be carried out as part of this including policy briefs. we evidence informed. it will help will also consider how to ally with working group organisations reflect on their own activity. processes, gain understanding about whether assessment practices achieve on completion of the opus project vitae will look to 2025 – 2026 the desired goals, and engage in build on the framework through dissemination and evolutive assessment based on new communication activities and look to embed as part of evidence as it becomes available. it will coara practice. we will look to seek opportunities to also help to ensure control and further leverage this. ownership of research assessment data by the research community. 9 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited • how does your institution plan to monitor and evaluate its assessment criteria, tools and processes? what will be the frequency? who will be involved in the evaluation? this action plan will be revised in january 2026 10 vitae and its membership programme are managed by the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited, an independent registered charity. vitae, © the careers research and advisory centre (crac) limited
