coaliton for advancing research assessment action plan 2024-2027 vrije universiteit amsterdam coara action plan 2024-2027 status approved by the executive board version 1.2 author(s) richard de waard, lieke van fastenhout, hanneke slop, sander bosch date 30 july 2024 context: recognition & rewards, strategy evaluation protocol, open science, barcelona declaration on research information introduction in december2019 the publication of the position paper ‘room for everyone’s talent’ of universities of the netherlands (unl), the netherlands federation of university medical centres (nfu), the royal netherlands academy of arts & sciences (knaw), the dutch research council (nwo) and care research netherlands (zonmw) marked the start of the recognition & rewards (r&r) program. the objective of this program as mentioned in the roadmap is to: • introduce greater diﬀerentiation and mobility into career pathways; • shift focus away from quantitative elements and towards the quality of the work; • acknowledge both the individual qualities and ambitions of academics and their contributions toward shared goals; • encourage quality leadership; • and stimulate open science. these ambitions were translated into a vision document for vrije universiteit amsterdam. since 2022 we are busy implementing this r&r vison. in 2022 vrije universiteit amsterdam signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) and joined the coalition on advancing research assessment (coara) to actively support the goals of this international reform movement which overlaps substantially with r&r. through our recognition & rewards program in combination with the national research evaluation procedures in the strategy evaluation protocol (sep 2012-2027) and our open science programme we felt we were already well underway. by signing, our university shows commitment to continuing our eﬀorts and further improving in these areas. this current action plan serves to contribute to, and promote the international reform agenda. it embeds existing practice and further actions which should ensure that the various forms of outputs, practices and activities maximise the quality and impact of our research. this action plan is a living document that will be updated regularly. ©vrije universiteit amsterdam 2/6 coara action plan 2024-2027 commitment current status objectives and actions 2024 – 2027 1. recognise the diversity of contributions this is one of the pillars of the recognition & 1a. our nine faculties are busy implementing these career to, and careers in, research in accordance rewards program. the frameworks for new paths according to the university guideline. at the end of with the needs and nature of the academic career paths were established by the 2024 they will have developed faculty specific career paths. research executive board in july 2023. in these, we have from 2025 onwards, all scientists will agree in their annual revised the academic career paths from assistant appraisal on which core domain they want to focus for a professor to associate and full professor. certain period of time. 1b. evaluation of career paths is addressed in the planning in self-evaluation reports in the context of the and control cycle via the annual plan and annual reports and national strategy evaluation protocol for public discussed in the administrative consultative meeting. at the research organisations, research units are free to beginning of 2026, we will take stock of the state of aﬀairs show their diversity in contributions (e.g. software, and determine the follow-up. data sets, editorships, monographs, contributions to society etc). 1c. the university is developing a reflection tool for the personal academic career path. we practice the principles of open science, by making scientific outputs (e.g., publications, data, 1d. the university is implementing open science through a software, educational materials) and the processes university-wide programme, that facilitates the necessary that led to them findable, accessible, interoperable requirements for open science practices in the domains and reusable (fair), and foster collaborations within research, education and impact/ engagement: academia as well as with societal partners. there is - infrastructure and tooling (e.g. data management more attention for involving societal stakeholders in tooling, platforms for citizen science) the research process (citizen science, - support & training (e.g. software and data skills, transdisciplinary research, public-private open educational resources) partnerships) and for engaging in a dialogue with - community engagement (e.g. community events society through science communication. around research data, open hardware, science we move away from focusing solely on the quantity communication) of research outputs, and give more emphasis to the - recognition & rewards (e.g. rewarding open quality of the scientific and social contribution of our practices, see also 2b) work. - policy (e.g. on open access publications, research data management, open educational resources) ©vrije universiteit amsterdam 3/6 coara action plan 2024-2027 vrije universiteit amsterdam participates in opensciencenl. 2. base research assessment primarily on this is implemented at the level of research 2a. more qualitative assessment criteria for academic staﬀ qualitative evaluation for which peer institutes through the strategy evaluation protocol. are used in a personal assessment portfolio review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators at the level of individual academics we have 2b. formulate guidelines for responsible use of metrics. developed and are using an assessment portfolio. in collaboration with faculty implementation teams, the our research intelligence team provides innovative, research intelligence team, the open science team and the responsible quantitative indicators based on open current research information system (cris) oﬃcers are research information. creating a road map for registration of responsible metrics in the vu cris. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research at the level of research institutes this is monitoring and evaluation assessment of journal- and publication- implemented through the strategy evaluation based metrics, in particular inappropriate protocol. see also 2b. formulate guidelines for responsible use of uses of journal impact factor (jif) and h- metrics index at the level of individual academics we have developed and are using an assessment portfolio. procedures for funding from the dutch research council nwo prohibit the use of jif and h-index. there we work with evidence-based cv’s. at the level of individual academics these metrics are no longer used in promotion of academic staﬀ and not used in allocation of internal grants. 4. avoid the use of rankings of research vrije universiteit amsterdam does not use global vrije universiteit amsterdam engages with other dutch organisations in research assessment university rankings in its assessment of research. we universities and our international network (e.g. aurora take a critical stance towards them and work actively network) on responsible use of, and communication about together with other dutch universities to bring international rankings. about a change in culture regarding these rankings ©vrije universiteit amsterdam 4/6 coara action plan 2024-2027 as reported in the recommendation paper “ranking the university”. vrije universiteit amsterdam signed the more than our rank initiative in december 2023 and put a disclaimer on our webpage about rankings where we also refer to coara. 5. commit resources to reforming research vrije universiteit amsterdam is committed to the the implementation of the academic career paths will take assessment as is needed to achieve the r&r program 2022-2026. several years. in addition, the focus will increasingly be on organisational changes committed to there is a program leader and budget for open science, leadership and teamwork over the next years implementation at strategic level at the vu. (2024-2026). academic staﬀ was involved in defining the new further integration of r&r in various programs within vu career paths and assessment procedures. amsterdam will be realized in the next 2 years (2024-2026). 6. review and develop research assessment vrije universiteit amsterdam was an early signatory 6a. monitor and review strategy evaluation protocol. criteria, tools and processes of the barcelona declaration on open research 6b. develop ways to advance and for assessing team science. information and is committed to making open 6c. continue participation in the coara working group on research information the norm. in analyses of the open infrastructures for responsible research assessment impact of research we make use of openalex and (oi4rra). openaire. 6d. application for funding for a coara project to co-create vrije universiteit amsterdam is involved in the tools and criteria for evaluations on diversity and equity. coara working group oi4rra on this subject. 6e. evaluate the new assessment criteria. 7. raise awareness of research assessment communication around our r&r program and 7a. training for heads of department about academic reform and provide transparent results. careerpaths and building successful teams q4 2024. communication, guidance, and training 7b. developing guideline documents ‘toolbox academic on assessment criteria and processes as vu started a ms teams community r&r. careers’ for scientists as well as for managers q4 2024. well as their use 7c. outreach activities to notify staﬀ of coara. ©vrije universiteit amsterdam 5/6 coara action plan 2024-2027 8. exchange practices and experiences to this is done in regular (online) meetings and a yearly 8a. communicate about, and participate in, recognition & enable mutual learning within and national recognition & rewards festival. in 2023 rewards events. beyond the coalition already the third r&r festival was held. 8b. vrije universiteit amsterdam will host a colleague of palacky university who will spend two days to see how a national online community platform rrview has research assessment is organized at our university. also been developed. a group on this platform is 8c. participate in the national chapter on assessment dedicated to coara. reform. 8d. exchange practices and ideas on the national online community platform rrview. 9. communicate progress made on communicate about results and participate in updates on our website recognition and rewards - vrije adherence to the principles and national recognition & rewards events universiteit amsterdam (vu.nl), newsletters, workshops, ms implementation of the commitments teams. exchange practices and ideas on the online community platform rrview and the university’s ms teams site. 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools evaluation is done through the ‘cultuurbarometer’, 10a. share this coara action plan on zenodo. based on solid evidence and the state-of- research on research culture at vrije universiteit 10b. communicate about the ‘cultuurbarometer’-results. the-art in research on research, and amsterdam. 10c. monitoring r&r results. make data openly available for evidence 10d. exchange practices and ideas on the online community gathering and research in our expertise center research integrity and open platform rrview. science (rios) research practices are being evaluated. vrije universiteit amsterdam also hosts the netherlands research integrity network (nrin) that practices research on research and facilitates worldwide collaboration, exchange and mutual learning on research integrity. ©vrije universiteit amsterdam 6/6
