university of graz research assessment reform coara action plan 2024 – 2027 introduction and overview the university of graz joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) in autumn 2022. the coalition’s core commitments closely align with the university’s efforts to reform research assessment. our guiding principles are to increase transparency and recognize the wide range of activities carried out by academic staff. in austria, universities are responsible for implementing and executing the legal framework for research evaluation. the university of graz has steadily improved its evaluation procedures, which are currently undergoing reform to adapt to the current challenges in the international higher education landscape, such as avoiding the inappropriate use of metrics, recognizing the diversity of contributions and valuing quality and impact over quantity. the reform has the potential to initiate a cultural change – towards recognition of a broad range of activities, competence orientation and development opportunities for employees. this cultural shift is a significant challenge. it is necessary because while quantitative methods are familiar, they do not provide a complete picture of all achievements of researchers. qualitative assessment methods on the other hand are able to provide a more comprehensive understanding of such achievements. the big concern amongst various stakeholders is that qualitative assessment methods are more burdensome, not easily comparable and more difficult to assess. support and training are crucial in countering this issue and in demonstrating the value of qualitative assessment approaches. the success of this research assessment reform depends on the commitment of the university management to this reform, the acceptance of the new modalities by the employees and the cooperation of the university units in the development and implementation. the reform is led by the vice rector for research and it is carried out in close cooperation with the whole rectorate, the senate, the deans of the faculties and the administrative departments. 1 06.2024 research assessment and its reform status quo research evaluation of units: research evaluation procedures are part of the university's quality management system and contribute to the management of the university's planning and decision- research evaluation of units making processes. academic research uniform, but subject-specific process, which units and departments are evaluated at comprises the following stages: least every seven years, with a focus on • narrative self-evaluation, including strategic development and profiling, optimisation orientation and attention to third-mission efforts and improvement. • peer visit and peer review • implementation workshop the procedure is flexible and differentiated, taking into account the the objectives are: research culture of each unit to be • reflection on research/research evaluated. evaluation criteria and data performance • support/impulse to further develop the collection are tailored to the unit's research profile and strengthen the scientific specialisation and focus. stakeholders in impact the units being evaluated are actively • further development through assessment encouraged to contribute and take by international peers • improvement of the promotion of young ownership throughout the evaluation researchers process. in many cases, external • exchange and understanding within the evaluators are brought in to review the university evaluation. professorial appointment procedures: the university of graz will hire highly qualified and promising scientists to strengthen its position in a wide range of research fields of strategic importance. educating students and training early-career researchers is a responsibility that the university of graz takes seriously. the university has developed a highly effective appointment procedure that takes into account candidates’ varying career levels. the procedure evaluates not only research, but also teaching, training, attention to gender equality and societal engagement. the staff appraisal is an essential tool for personnel development at the university. it allows for exchange of information between employees and their supervisors in a confidential setting. it provides an opportunity for feedback and the shaping of personal development plans. 2 06.2024 research reform a detailed analysis and description of the evaluation landscape at the university of graz was carried out in the work package “alternative research assessment” of the arqus r.i. h2020 project. furthermore, we internally explored international models and approaches for evaluating research. during this process, two core instruments were developed: the research fora and the activity framework. both instruments prioritize quality and impact, consider a broad range of academic activities, involve stakeholders and align with coara. the activity framework is designed to address the individual level, while research fora are intended to facilitate discussion and development at the organizational level. both of these tools are currently in the process of testing and further development. activity framework: the activity framework is an alternative form of assessment that outlines the expectations placed on scientists at different career stages. through working groups that include activity framework employees from all career levels, transparency on the achievements expected at the discipline-specific items for the activity respective career level and research culture framework are developed at a “pilot • activities in research and research funding faculty”. the items developed are • promotion of early-stage researchers • teaching achievements and innovations coordinated with the relevant • societal engagement / outreach activities administrative departments to • management performance and transferable determine if the necessary background skills information is available or needs to be guidance and support in evaluation and appointment procedures, resource allocation, incentives, monitoring gathered. the goal is to develop a the performance catalog of criteria and corresponding values for each career level which are the objective is for the individual to gain an awareness presented in a structured report for of the expectations placed on academics at their respective career stage, with the intention of evaluation by management or a developing accordingly. a second objective is to committee (peers). a university-wide distribute resources fairly and transparently on the implementation will take place in basis of their performances. stages. the first faculty will start in 2024. other faculties will follow successively. 3 06.2024 the research fora, successfully piloted at the faculty of natural sciences, are an alternative form of research research fora • bottom-up, proactive, flexible and continuous evaluation at our university and are process now set to roll out to other faculties in • shaping a department‘s vision/strategy accordance with rectorate and faculty • with possibility to replace traditional format of management. the goal is to increase evaluation format for research units to internally discuss topics research performance and visibility of centered around: innovative research, impact within research at the university of graz in scientific community and the society, international accordance with the coara visibility. principles. they are envisioned as a outcome: strategy document on the development for the next ten years continuous, inclusive, proactive and bottom-up process along discussion • maintaining and improving the performance and events in order to work out and bring visibility of research at the university of graz to life a vision and strategy for the • increasing the attractiveness of the university of graz for professors and early-stage researchers to different branches of science. be appointed feedback from the pilot is very positive and department heads especially valued the direct involvement of the rector and the possibility to present to him. the research assessment reform is included in the university’s strategic documents. the status of the research assessment reform, the core commitments of coara and case studies from other universities that have successfully reformed research assessment will be presented at an event. regarding the activity framework, staff, and especially supervisors and management, will be provided with comprehensive training on how to effectively use the activity framework in staff appraisals. all employees are provided with informational materials and receive continuous updates on the activity framework. we disseminate best practices through workshops, training sessions, events, regular exchanges with partner universities in a “task force on alternative research assessment” and contributions to coara working groups. at “universities austria” and other national forums, we will be carefully considering and addressing the important issue of reforming research assessment. 4 06.2024 core commitments & actions commitment state modification/adaption/action timeframe • research information system contains • research fora (rf) will be held; • rf as of november 2022 at pilot 1. recognise the diversity of contributions to- and data on networking, outreach and • activity framework (af) will be faculty as alternative to research careers in- research, in accordance with the activities for a wider audience; developed; evaluation needs and nature of the research  both focusing on impact and quality, • from 2024 on at other faculties. • outreach activities and teaching are under consideration of a broad range of ------------------------------------ partly included in the research activities; • af pilot as of september 2023 evaluation of departments/research • development of items 2024 branches and at the individual level as • af: adaption and implementation of • data and information availability well, for example in the context of new activities in the existing research check in parallel in 2024 requirement profiles and qualification information system; • step-by-step implementation as of agreements; • launch of a personal profile page on the 01 2025 activities in the af (a page with • 2nd half of 2024 start in other customizable settings); faculties ------------------------------------------ • coara working group: working group on reforming academic career assessment (aca); • internal and external peer reviewers in • af: the catalog of activities is intended • af: exact evaluation process will 2. base research assessment primarily on research evaluation; to serve as a basis for development be developed until q3 25 qualitative evaluation for which peer review is discussions and to support the fair ------------------------------------ central, supported by responsible use of • appointment procedures: peer allocation of resources; • rf, see above quantitative indicators reviewers and responsible use of a set ------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------ of bibliometric indicators; h-index is • rf predominantly along qualitative • from 2025 on external peer avoided, if someone is requesting it, indicators, a discussion-oriented reviewers/experts he/she will be informed about its approach using workshops; shortcomings; ------------------------------------------ • conduct evaluations without internal peer reviewers 5 06.2024 see above • ongoing information about responsible • ongoing 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research metrics; assessment of journal- and publication- based • peers can be included on a voluntary metrics, in particular inappropriate uses of basis; journal impact factor (jif) and h-index • rankings of research organisations are • no modification • no additional actions in the period 4. avoid the use of rankings of research not used in research assessment; only of 2023-2027 organisations in research assessment data of highly cited publications from the leiden ranking in combination with further indicators and other background information are used; • resources for the • funding of one position for coordinating • af: as of q3 2024 5. commit resources to reforming research disciplines/departments to hold the activity framework; assessment as is needed to achieve the workshops in the context of rf are organisational changes committed to available; • experts (peers) engaged in the rf are remunerated (unit level); • direct involvement of rector and vice rector in rf; • position for the coordination of the rf funded; • position for research evaluation funded; • continuous review of research • af: participation of the whole • ongoing 6. review and develop research assessment assessment: (fineec quality audit, organisation (management, criteria, tools and processes arqus r.i. alternative assessment; task administration, researchers from all force on alternative research career levels); assessment (tf), coara wg aca); 6 06.2024 • rf event 2022 in pilot faculty; • research assessment reform event • rf: pilot event: nov 2022 7. raise awareness of research assessment • meetings of the working group af; (coara, rf, af); • rf: one event planned per reform and provide transparent communication, • workshops with rectorate; • trainings and workshops, university- participating faculty. guidance, and training on assessment criteria wide discussion event/communication, ------------------------------------ and processes as well as their use handbooks • university-wide discussion event q4 2024 • austrian-wide research assessment reform event: 04 2024 (in preparation) ------------------------------------ • af: trainings and workshops as of q4 2024 • ongoing national and international • coara coalition and working group; • task force on research 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable exchange (arqus, universities austria, • task force alternative research assessment (tf) as of november mutual learning within and beyond the coara, eua); assessment (tf); 2023 coalition ----------------------------------- • coara working group: reforming academic career assessment - • research assessment action plan is • action plan published: q3 2024 9. communicate progress made on adherence to published on zenodo and university • ongoing the principles and implementation of the website commitments • active communication of research assessment reform; • ongoing evaluation and examination • ongoing evaluation and analysis and • ongoing monitoring 10. evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on with research on research; consideration of research on research; solid evidence and the state-of-the-art in • active participation in coara activities; research on research, 7 06.2024
