reforming research assessment at mid sweden university - coara action plan 2023–2028 background mid sweden university, miun, is a global university with a regional commitment where we do research and educate for life. our work leads to increased attractiveness, relevance, and quality, as well as a sustainable development. globally, there is a consensus that reforms to research assessment are needed to enhance quality and foster strong research cultures. coara, coalition for advancing research assessment, is a recent global initiative dedicated to advancing changes in research evaluation to recognize diverse outputs, practices, and activities maximizing impact. founded on ten commitments, the coalition provides a unified framework for assessing research, researchers, and institutions. it involves qualitative evaluations emphasizing peer-review, complemented by responsible use of quantitative indicators. by joining the coalition in october 2023, miun committed to reforming its research assessment practices in line with coara guidelines. research organizations are at the same time encouraged to design context-specific assessments that safekeep their autonomy, and tailor research evaluations that monitor specific institutional values. members are urged to share their progress within a year, following an action plan with a 5-year time frame. miun’s plan presents prioritized areas and broadly outlined reforms, detailing contributions from researchers and other personnel, as well as ongoing collaborative efforts. progress will be monitored through annual updates emphasizing advancements. prioritized areas miun's vision, strategy, and organizational characteristics have guided collaborative reflections on the coara core commitments, identifying priority areas for reform. our efforts will focus on the following areas: 1/4 miun is active in the work of open science as a vital foundation for ensuring the integrity, quality, and relevance of research miun advocates the recognition and inclusion of diverse research merits in the planning and assessment of research careers, such as valuing collaboration with the surrounding community in research. miun upholds stringent standards for research quality and integrity by continually enhancing the methods of collegial research evaluation action plan and timeframe coara requires simultaneous reforms and changes in attitude within the research community. what do we need to change, how and when? goals actions responsibility a. miun encourages cultural 2025 head of the changes within the establish and implement a communications organization by further communication plan to department together with enhancing attitudes, work ensure that all relevant staff deputy vice-chancellor for procedures, and practices and researchers are up to quality, university director, related to science, date regarding miun’s deans recruitment, and research strategy and coara evaluation. priorities. make sure that communication efforts are continuous and interactive and include for example workshops, forums for discussion, and platforms 2026 – 2028 encourage changes in mindset and methods through communication, dialogue, guidelines and training. examples of measures: - revise assessment criteria, processes, and tools - revise administrative tools and templates for recruitment and career development 2/4 based on new recommendations b. miun is active in the work 2025 dau (data access unit) with open science as a vital implement open access and together with deputy vice- foundation for ensuring the data etc (look at the data chancellor for quality, integrity, quality, and access unit action plan, relevance of research.ௗ national and international policy. ) 2026 – 2028 implement reforms through internal working groups and by integrating identified reforms into existing decision- making forums c. miun advocates the 2025 deans and head of hr- recognition and inclusion of initiate and implement cross- department together with diverse research merits in functional working groups deputy vice-chancellor for the planning and with representatives from the quality, university director assessment of research academic appointments careers, such as valuing councils and hr-department collaboration with the to identify and operationalize surrounding community in reforms in merits and research. recruitment. first steps include: mapping existing miun and faculty policy and regulation, making gap- analyses in relation to coara recommendations, and identifying needs of adjustment. 2026 – 2028 implement cross-functional working groups to identify and operationalize reforms in merits and recruitment. next steps. d. miun upholds stringent 2025 deputy vice-chancellor for standards for research to enhance miun’s quality quality, deans quality and integrity by systems, use coara in the continually enhancing the process of revising the methods of collegial existing quality system. research evaluation 3/4 initiate and implement cross- functional working groups with representatives from faculties, faculty offices and the vice chancellors office to review and adjust current research and education evaluation practices to identify and adjust gaps in relation to miun’s strategy and coara priorities. (qjdjh nh\ vwdnhkroghuv ௗௗ 2026 – ௗௗ implement the reviewed and adjusted research evaluation practices done in 2025 priorities e. miun facilitates mutual 2025 deputy vice-chancellor for learning by exchanging engage actively in national quality, university director, practices and experiences and international coara deans within and beyond the working groups to learn from coalition through national other institutions and chapter working groups, contribute to the broader coara working groups, and conversation on research other networks. assessment reforms. share best practices within the miun community through for example workshops, reports and internal working groups. 2026 – 2028 engage actively and take more responsibility in national coara working groups to learn from other institutions and contribute to the broader conversation on research assessment reforms. share best practices within the miun community through for example workshops, reports and internal working groups 4/4
