updated 24.6.2024 coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) – humak action plan 2024-2028 organisation humak university of applied sciences responsible person timo parkkola (education director) contact person konsta ylimaunu (rdi advisor) 1. introduction the agreement on reforming research assessment sets a common path towards changes in assessment practices for research, researchers and research performing organisations. the main aim is to maximise the quality and impact of research. the work towards the agreement was started in 2022 through which signatory organisations can become members of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). the agreement paves the way for organisations to work together towards the implementation of needed changes in responsible reasearch assessment (rra). humak signed the agreement in june 2023. therefore, humak is committed to the following coara commitments: • key commitments o , o o , o • supporting commitments o as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to o o o o o evaluate practices, criteria and tools based on solid evidence and the state-of the-art in research on research, in the context of coara, all the signatories commit to share their organisation’s plans for implementation of the core commitments in form of an action plan. this action plan must include defined milestones www.humak.fi vat: 147476-1 ilkantie 4, 00400 helsinki, finland updated 24.6.2024 regarding the rra development work and be published within one year of signing the agreement. signatories commit to regularly demonstrate the progress of development of evaluation criteria, processes and tools that fulfil the core commitments. within five years of signing the agreement at least one cycle of review and development of the assessment criteria, tools and processes must be gone through. 2. current situation humak is committed to the principles of open science and research and to promoting them in its activities. humak's culture is built on open sharing of knowledge and expertise and the development of new knowledge in networks. humak's principles of openness have been approved by the humak executive team on 17 august 2017. humak has signed the declaration on open science and research 2020-2025. humak is already committed to the following national guidelines regarding open science: • the research ethics advisory board's guideline on good scientific practice and procedures for handling misconduct and fraud in science. • the research ethics advisory board's guidelines on the ethical principles of research with human participants and ethical review in the human sciences in finland. humak has also started the work in developing its rdi impact assessment, data gathering processes and data exploitation, which has clear synergy with the coara action plan. the aim of this coara action plan is to consolidate current responsible research assessment (rra) methods and implement additional steps for embedding coara commitments into humak's daily operations. the cornerstone of the plan is to enhance the impact of research outcomes and ensure research quality. the execution of the action plan will begin in mid-2024. 3. humak’s action plan for responsible research assessment 2024-2028 the starting point of the action plan is to document and evaluate humak’s current research and researcher evaluation processes. based on this information possible development areas will be identified in accordance with the coara principles and the needed additions and developments are made to the rra-processes. the renewed processes will be implemented into humak’s daily work via piloting process and evaluated accordingly. engagement, dissemination and promotion of responsible assessment action result/milestone timetable responsibility commitment of resources to resource (human and other) 2024 humak research assessment reform commitment to the rra work by executive team the humak executive team. resources allocated for the whole duration of the action plan. www.humak.fi vat: 147476-1 ilkantie 4, 00400 helsinki, finland updated 24.6.2024 establishing humak’s established humak rra working 2024 humak responsible research/er group for the whole duration of the executive team assessment working group action plan. wg consists of people from all relevant parts of humak organisation. updating the action plan and action plan reviewed and updated yearly humak’s progress reporting (if needed) yearly by the humak responsible rra working group. progress research/er regarding the rra-work reported assessment on a regular basis to the responsible working group director. communication and all relevant humak-specific parties 2024-2028 humak’s cooperation have been involved in the responsible development work. best practices research/er and tools have been communicated assessment internally and externally via relevant working group channels. working in relevant networks and working groups (including the coara national chapter finland) throughout the rra action plan process. research assessment in humak action result/milestone timetable responsibility current status evaluation of rdi written report of the current state, 2025 humak’s process in research assessment, obstacles and possibilities of responsible key challenges and priorities responsible research assessment in research/er identification humak including suggestions for assessment further development in line with working group the coara principles. rra quality criteria and policy humak’s responsible research 2025-2027 humak’s development and piloting in rdi assessment framework, policy and responsible necessary tools developed, piloted research/er and put into action. guidance assessment material provided in the humak working group, intranet and trainings organised for humak the relevant staff members. model development for rdi impact measurement, data services collection and communication developed and deployed in the humak rdi process and systems. evaluation yearly evaluation of humak 2028- humak’s responsible research assessment responsible www.humak.fi vat: 147476-1 ilkantie 4, 00400 helsinki, finland updated 24.6.2024 processes, criteria and tools. research/er possible suggestions for further assessment development in line with the coara working group principles. researcher assessment in humak action result/milestone timetable responsibility current status evaluation of written report of the current state, 2025 humak’s researcher assessment, key obstacles and possibilities of responsible challenges and priorities responsible researcher (and rdi- research/er identification staff) assessment in humak assessment including suggestions for further working group development in line with the coara principles. development and piloting of researcher profile in humak 2025-2027 humak’s uas-specific researcher career defined and career path model responsible path model in humak developed and piloted. responsible research/er researcher assessment policy, assessment framework and necessary tools working group developed and deployed. guidance material available for the recruiters/evaluators in the humak intranet. trainings organised for relevant staff members. development and piloting of the need for uas-specific career 2025-2027 humak’s uas-specific career path model path model for rdi administrative responsible for rdi administrative staff staff identified, piloted and research/er developed. responsible assessment assessment framework and necessary tools working group developed and deployed. guidance material available for the recruiters/evaluators in the humak intranet. trainings organised for relevant staff members. evaluation yearly evaluation of humak 2028- humak’s responsible researcher/rdi responsible administrative staff assessment research/er processes, criteria and tools. assessment possible suggestions for further working group development in line with the coara principles. www.humak.fi vat: 147476-1 ilkantie 4, 00400 helsinki, finland updated 24.6.2024 list of authors: timo parkkola, education director konsta ylimaunu, rdi advisor the plan has been accepted by humak executive team on 14th of may 2024 and will be updated when needed. www.humak.fi vat: 147476-1 ilkantie 4, 00400 helsinki, finland
