university of warwick – coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) action plan the university of warwick became a signatory of coara in the summer of 2023. in the following months, it formed a working group to develop an action plan and oversee its implementation over the next five years. about the university: the university of warwick is a leading uk institution known for its innovative approach to education and research. founded in 1965, it has become a globally recognised university with a strong focus on interdisciplinary research and international collaboration. warwick offers various undergraduate, postgraduate, and research programs across various disciplines. the university is committed to fostering an inclusive and dynamic community, with an emphasis on the importance of professional development and diverse career opportunities for its staff and students. research culture at warwick: the university’s research strategy prioritises the following six areas that underpin the research undertaken at warwick with the goal of providing a positive research culture that is both inclusive and collegiate: • enhance disciplinary and interdisciplinary excellence • excellence with impact through real-world changes • foster a positive, inclusive, collegiate and dynamic research culture • communicate our research on the world stage through showcasing via multi-media communications. • partnership with the industry, regional, national and international organisations, institutes and other higher education providers. • innovation & sustainability in every step and action. the national centre for research culture (ncrc) is central to the university's research strategy, which aims to improve the research environment across uk higher education by bringing people together to share ideas and best practices. the ncrc network has been created as a solutions-focused group designed to exchange, debate, and challenge ideas surrounding research culture, with a view to remove inequities in conversation and engage collaboratively in opportunities to identify gaps, create new knowledge and effect change. 1 responsible research assessment at warwick: the university’s current research assessment practices are guided by a set of evaluation principles based on the leiden manifesto. the university is committed to the critical role that peer review and expert judgement play in the assessment of research but also recognises the value that quantitative metrics can play in complementing and supporting decision-making. the coara action plan: within the university's research culture context, the coara working group developed the following action plan to implement the coara commitments. the action plan has been created with careful consideration of the existing strategies at the university such as the concordat and hr excellence in research, ensuring alignment with ongoing initiatives and activities. the action plan is a live document that will be reviewed annually and updated to reflect the continued engagement of the working group with our academic community, researchers at all levels and disciplines, research enablers and professional services. commitment action start end 1.1. review guidance and policy on academic and academic-related promotions, rewards and recruitment activities against the coara commitments in collaboration with colleagues in human oct-24 mar-25 1. recognise the diversity of resources who lead on promotions and rewards. contributions to, and careers, in 1.2. develop a policy and guidance on ‘responsible research assessment’ for university research in accordance with the aug-25 jan-26 activities. needs and nature of the research. 1.3. engage the research community about their disciplines' current and developing output practice. ensure the outcomes of this engagement are publicised widely and contribute to the sep-24 jun-25 development of university research systems and processes. 2 1.4. work with the arts and social sciences faculties to develop guidance on the fair assessment sep-24 jun-25 of the range of practice and non-traditional outputs that can be applied across the faculties. 1.5. review and revise the guidance on publication ethics included in the university of warwick open access policy - ensuring the inclusion of all individuals involved in the research reported by oct-24 mar-25 the output. 1.6. conduct training sessions to expand researchers' understanding of diverse career paths by explicitly referencing hr excellence in research, focusing on its major thrust of training and feb-25 _ professional development. 1.7. implement and promote the newly piloted promotional pathway for technical specialists to ongoing _ provide them with career advancement opportunities within the university. 1.8. in collaboration with the academic community investigate the possibility of implementing the aug-25 _ helsinki initiative for multilingualism into university activities. 2.1. ensure that the new research administration systems are configured to capture and display all 2. base research assessment mar-25 may-25 relevant research activity according to discipline best practices and researcher needs. primarily on qualitative evaluation for which peer 2.2. commit to ensuring that all publishing activities at the university have the facilities and sep-24 _ review is central, supported by support to use best practices in open research and responsible metrics. responsible use of quantitative indicators. 2.3. within the university ensure that all of our academic review processes consider the full range mar-26 _ of academic and research activity undertaken by staff members. 3 3.1. engage the research community about their disciplines' current and developing use of metrics. ensure the outcomes of this engagement are publicised widely and contribute to the sep-24 jun-25 development of university research systems and processes. 3. abandon inappropriate uses in research assessment of 3.2. embed coara principles into existing researcher development provisions and produce a aug-24 oct-24 journal- and publication-based summary map of how and where this is embedded. metrics, in particular, inappropriate uses of journal 3.3. using the expertise from within our academic community, contribute to the development of ongoing _ impact factor (jif) and h-index. international, interdisciplinary research assessment and responsible research measures. 3.4. once approved, develop mechanisms to ensure adherence to the university of warwick sep-25 _ policy on responsible research assessment. 4.1. working with our academic community on what they find most valuable, develop a policy on how the university will assess the various rankings that we are contributing our data to and how aug-25 jan-26 4. avoid the use of rankings for they can be made as ‘fair and responsible’ as possible. research organisations in 4.2. investigate becoming a signatory of the inorms ‘more than our rank’ initiative. sep-24 nov-24 research assessment. 4.3. work with marketing and communications to ensure the use of rankings in the university aug-25 jan-26 marketing is made with consideration of the policy on responsible research metrics. 5.1. review and revise the university of warwick's principles on research assessment’ to ensure oct-24 mar-25 5. commit resources to reform that they align with the coara commitments and define warwick's strategic objectives. research assessment as needed to achieve the 5.2. ensure that new roles developed in this area have an explicit alignment to support the work of oct-24 jan-25 the university in implementing coara in their various areas of responsibility. 4 organisational changes committed to. 5.3. develop internal training for research enabling, professional services staff on the issues of oct-24 jan-25 ‘responsible research assessment’ and the university's commitment to coara. 6.1. extend the mentoring support available in promotions to enhance engagement with narrative mar-26 _ 6. review and develop research cvs. assessment criteria, tools and processes 6.2. when looking at any form of research assessment, ensure that, where possible, our activities mar-25 _ align with our 'principles for the evaluation of research’ and coara. 7. raise awareness of research 7.1. develop a research assessment contribution for the 2024 international research culture annual assessment reform and provide conference to engage researchers and research enabling staff, as well as establishing this as a aug-24 action. transparent communication, regular part of the programme. guidance, and training on assessment criteria and 7.2. advertise the opportunity and provide support to allow projects on the evaluation of research annual apr-25 processes as well as their use. to bid for enhancing research culture funding. action. 8.1. as a member of the uk national chapter, engage with its activities and promote membership ongoing _ to other institutions. 8. exchange practices and experiences to enable mutual 8.2. adopt a policy of openness in relation to the activities of the coara working group to share aug-24 _ learning within and beyond the documents and other outputs with the coalition and the wider community. coalition. 8.3. working with the other members of the uk national chapter, contribute to the work of the ongoing _ coara working groups and share that work with other chapter members. 5 9.1. publish the action plan on the university’s website with a publicly visible rag status against 9. communicate progress aug-24 aug-24 each major action. made on adherence to the principles and implementation 9.2. annually report on progress against the action plan to the university’s research committee. oct-24 _ of the commitments. 9.3. standing item for the group to report back to org. sep-24 _ evaluate practices, criteria and 10.1. actively contribute to the work of the coara coalition, working groups and the uk national ongoing tools based on solid evidence chapter. and the state-of-the-art in 10.2. actively engage with national research assessment processes to ensure they are, wherever research on research, and make ongoing possible, aligned with the coara principles. data openly available for evidence-gathering and 10.3. work with the org to suggest process and policy amendments as required to introduce the research. sep-24 feb-25 use of new activities, such as the use of narrative cvs, reverse mentoring, open peer review, etc. if you’d like to find out more about our work implementing the coara commitments, please see our website for more information or contact us at scholarlycomms@warwick.ac.uk. 6
