2024 coara action plan and commitments 2023 - 2027 uit the arctic university of norway uit the arctic university of norway coara action plan and commitments 2023 – 2027 uit the arctic university of norway (uit) signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) on november 16, 2022, and became part of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). the action plan specifies how uit will fulfill the core commitments of the agreement within the stipulated timeframe. the action plan has been assessed by pro-rector education and development, kathrine tveiterås and is shared with coara june 21, 2024. the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra) arra provides a common direction for the further development of assessment practices for research, researchers, and research-performing organisations. the overall goal is to strengthen the quality and impact of research. the agreement includes the principles, commitments, and time frame for reforms and lays out the principles for a coalition of organizations and institutions to work together in implementing the changes. by signing the agreement uit has committed to a common vision, that the assessment of research, researchers and research organizations recognizes different forms of the results, practices and activities. furthermore, assessment is primarily based on qualitative assessment, where peer assessment is central, supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators. national and institutional guidelines for research assessment (nor-cam and uit-cam) there is in norway generally not a tradition to primarily relying on quantitative indicators in research assessment. there are still good reasons to further improve and develop assessment practices for research and researchers to recognize and merit a wider range of academic output, practices and activities. universities norway (uhr) has developed a guideline the norwegian career assessment matrix (nor-cam), which builds upon the european open science career assessment matrix (os-cam). uhr has initiated a national network for sharing experiences and best practices in developing institutional versions of nor-cam and for discussing practical and strategic aspects of arra. the network is approved as the coara national chapter for norway. uit participates in the network with two representatives. uit has decided to use nor-cam as a framework for further work on reforming assessment in academic careers, with adjustments adapted to uit`s study program and research portfolio. 1 uit the arctic university of norway coara action plan and commitments 2023 - 2027 actions target when responsible information about arra and coara and the nor-cam toolbox uit signs arra and enrolls uit november 2022 rector in coara. uit joins the national nor-cam november 2022 rector network. coara and arra is presented vice-deans for research and innovation january 2024 pro-rector research and and discussed in fsu (research development strategic committee) at uit. coara and nor-cam is faculty, department, and unit leaders april 2023 pro-rector research and presented and discussed at the uit development leadership meeting with all management levels at uit. involving academic employees in revision of assessment criteria, processes, and tools a working group for considering academic employees, faculty, june 2023 pro-rector research and adaptation and implementation of department, and unit leaders. development nor-cam and the principles in arra to uit is established. 2 presentation of working group faculty, department, and unit leaders january – june 2024 pro-rector quality education, report with recommendations and financial and organization an uit competence assessment division and research, and matrix in relevant forums (uit- education and communication cam). division plan for initial face of rector, pro-rectors, and faculty leaders june 2024 financial and organization implementation of uit -cam division and research, and presented and discussed at the education and communication dean`s meeting. uit-cam will be division part of implementation of new national regulation regarding teaching a research positions and recruitment positions. process for implementing new rector, pro-rectors, and faculty leaders august 2024 financial and organization national regulation regarding division and research, and teaching a research positions and education and communication recruitment positions, including division uit-cam/arra, presented, and discussed in the dean`s meeting. orientation on process for all of uit 2024 financial and organization implementing new national division and research, regulation regarding teaching a education and communication research positions and recruitment division positions, including uit- cam/arra, presented at relevant forums. revise uit regulation for staff all of uit 2024 financial and organization appointment and guidelines for division assessment committees (new national regulations, arra, uit- cam). proposed revision is sent to the entire university for consultation. update relevant templates, faculty, department, applicants, academic 2024/2025 hr financial and organization 3 guidelines and tools for applicants employees, and assessment committees division for positions and advancement, and for assessment committees. use of uit-cam and the all employees, assessment committees, 2024/2025 hr financial and organization assessment matrix in recruitment and faculty, department and unit leaders division and competence assessment. include arra and uit-cam in academic employees, assessment 2025 onwards hr financial and organization career plans and development and committees, and faculty, department, and division performance reviews. unit leaders implement arra and uit-cam faculty, department, and unit leaders 2025/2026 hr financial and organization in uit program for leadership division and research, and development. education and communication division further develop uit-cam with academic employees, faculty, 2026 onwards hr financial and organization versions tailored to different career department, and unit leaders division and research, and paths and levels. develop and education and communication adapt the assessment matrix to division different disciplines. training in the application of new criteria, processes and tools training in the regulations and all employees, assessment committees, 2025/2026 hr financial and organization methods for selection in and faculty, department, and unit leaders division accordance with uit-cam and arra. exchange practices and experiences. communicate progress participate in the universities 2022 onwards hr financial and organization norway (uhr) nor- division and office of cam/coara network. research and innovation a relevant topic in the yerun alliance. 4 implementation of the principles in 2024-2027 rector uit-cam/arra is part of complying to the principles in charter for researchers. 5
