16.4.2024 coara action plan 2024 hanken school of economics, finland assessment principles at the hanken school of economics the hanken school of economics signed the agreement on reforming research assessment and joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) on 23.12.2022. apart from the coara agreement, hanken’s responsible assessment of research is based on further agreements and declarations such as: - the declaration of research assessment (dora) - eosc declaration - the declaration for open science and research 2020-2025 - policy for open scholarship - policy for open access to research data and methods - policy for open access to scholarly publications - policy for open education - furthermore, hanken adheres to the following: - plans s - unesco recommendation on open science - the eight ambitions of open science (european commission) - ehea rome ministerial communiqué’s statement on academic freedom - fair data - the research data alliance (rda) - recommendation for the responsible evaluation of a researcher in finland - researcher’s curriculum vitae template (recommendation of the finnish national board on research integrity tenk) - hrs4r - hr strategy for researchers the road to assessment reform based on the above, hanken has established a dora and a tenure track task force that both came with recommendations for new personnel instructions and guidelines for the recruitment and promotion of faculty in the research track in the spring of 2023. hanken’s latest personnel instructions have come into force in the fall of 2023, including the establishment of new guidelines and processes for faculty recruitment and promotion in the research track.1 the new guidelines are more holistic and place more emphasis on a variety of activities of faculty members across research, teaching, service, and societal impact. for the research track, research is the most important of the four different qualification areas followed by teaching, and then service and societal impact. research evaluations are primarily to be based on the quality and content of intellectual contributions, their originality and impact; assessed through peer review. the review can be complemented with a responsible use of quantitative indicators. recruitment and promotion processes include the department committee (dc), faculty recruitment and promotion committee (frp), and are supported by hr throughout. further stipulations for faculty management stem from hanken’s strategy (last version adopted in dec 2023), the university’s national and international accreditations, and national and international laws and regulations. the 2023 strategy including its elements regarding research and faculty management, and the 2023 revisions of the personnel instructions and tenure track guidelines and regulations in the research track are currently under implementation. faculty that is already employed in the research track within the previous personnel instructions may apply to be transferred to follow this personnel instruction and be evaluated for a promotion within the new system. hence the implementation of new criteria has started with regards to recruitment in 2023 but is rolled out gradually with regards to promotion. at the time of writing this action plan, hanken is revisiting its teaching track, which is expected to result in new personnel instructions and their implementation from fall 2024. 1 the board of hanken school of economics approved the personnel instructions on 6 september 2023, and they come into force on 1 october 2023. the new tenure track guidelines for the 2023 tenure track system were confirmed by the rector on 5 december 2023, while the guidelines for the previous 2017 tenure track system (personnel instruction approved by the board on 24 may 2017) was confirmed by the rector 19/01/2023. coara reflection action timing responsible unit target and indicators comments/altered current status points actions 1 reflect on your strategy 1. rollout of strategy 1. 2024-2025 management team new personnel 1. in implementation and change approach implementation 2. from 2024 spring (mt), hr, department instructions in place in the phase 2. rollout of promotion until the promotion committees and the fall of 2024 2. processes in place, guidelines in the of the last faculty faculty recruitment and first recruitments research track member hired promotion committee according to new 3. specifications of according to the old (frp committee); rector personnel instructions guidelines and criteria who wishes to in the research processes as well use them track ongoing, first as new personnel 3. specifications during promotions yet to instructions for the spring 2023, new come teaching track personnel instructions 3. teaching track task 4. continuous and implementation force concluded improvement based from fall 2024 recommendations in on any national 4. continuous. e.g., next jan 2024, community or international accreditation cycle involvement ongoing updates of the set of expected in 2025- recommendations we 2026 adhere to 2 involve your institutional 5. trainings for the 5a. training rollout spring hr, rector trainings completed to training to be developed community in the change implementation of 2024: faculty recruitment frp, heads of subjects and rolled out process new recruitment and and promotion committee (hos) and heads of promotion processes (frp), hos, hod department (hod) current training to and guidelines in the doctoral researchers research track 5b. training offered to revisions to suggestions included in specific 6. community any new department to teaching track doctoral courses involvement for committee members, and guidelines and processes the formulation any new hos/hod upon appointment new personnel of guidelines and instructions in place fall processes in the 6. spring 2024 2024 teaching track 3 identify key challenges to 7. instructions to 7. prior to sending hr, quality all material for the revisions to all documents address external evaluators in out any promotion unit, research implementation of ongoing with the rollout promotion processes case for evaluation services new recruitment and of promotions in the in the research track according to new promotion processes research track need to be revised guidelines needs to be in place 8. possible need to 8. academic year before any such change hanken’s 2025-2026 recruitment or evaluations definitions and 9. continuous take place during 2024 measurements of engagement scholarly activity for aacsb accreditation 9. need for ongoing engagement with accreditation and funding bodies nationally and internationally to align their evaluations as well with coara and to ensure training for their evaluators is offered nationally and internationally 4 recognise the diversity 10. specifications of 10. spring 2024 management team (mt), new personnel personal statements of contributions to, and guidelines and 11. academic year hr, rector instructions in place in the in the research track careers in, research in processes as well 2024-2025 fall of 2024 reflect on the diversity of accordance with the as new personnel contributions needs and nature of the instructions for the guidelines developed for research teaching track temporary appointments the revisions of the 11. promotion of teaching track are transparency ongoing and openness gender and nationality in temporary balance are kept in appointments (e.g., of mind when appointing post docs employed department committees in research projects) and evaluators 5 base research 12. revision of guidance 12a. individual level: dc, frp, hr, quality unit, the research assessment assessment primarily on given to evaluation rolled out with upcoming research services of individuals in qualitative evaluation panels in the research recruitments and recruitment and for which peer review assessment of the promotions promotion has been is central, supported school revised by responsible use of 12b. collective level: quantitative indicators revisions to be done with accreditation and assessment cycles 6 abandon inappropriate 13. revisions of letters to within a holistic uses in research external evaluators as evaluation that focuses on assessment of journal- in points 5 and 7 four categories (research, and publication-based teaching, service, metrics, in particular impact), publication inappropriate uses of metrics are used as a journal impact factor part of background (jif) and h-index data in recruitment and promotion publication metrics are used for hanken-level kpi and for various rewards (e.g., research budgets) 7 avoid the use of n/a to date, neither hanken’s rankings of research periodical research organisations in research evaluations nor any assessment of the accreditations stipulate any ranking of organisational units 8 commit resources to 14. appointment of task rector, hr, quality unit, to date, hr supports reforming research forces as needed research services, frp all recruitment and assessment as is committee promotion processes, needed to achieve the the quality unit all organisational changes accreditations, and committed to research services other research assessments and evaluations 9 review and develop 15. continuous tenk cvs are in use research assessment improvement as in criteria, tools, and point 4 processes 10 raise awareness of 16. updated materials 16a-18a. materials and hr sufficient information research track materials research assessment available to process descriptions for and materials available under development; reform and provide external applicants the research track spring to applicants and teaching track materials transparent (recruitment 2024 tenure track candidates pending upon new communication, processes), internal according to otm-r personnel instructions guidance, and tenure track 16b.-18b. materials and principles (hrs4r) training on candidates (tenure process descriptions for assessment criteria track evaluations) the teaching track fall and processes as 17. supporting materials 2024 well as their use available to members of the department committees and the frp committee (trainings as in point 5) 18. updated process descriptions in ims 11 exchange practices 19. exchange of good continuous research services, eu-level university national co-operation: and experiences to practices nationally engage.eu steering group cooperation, engage. ongoing. enable mutual learning with the finnish eu wp 5.4, enhances within and beyond the national board on research support by international co- coalition research integrity developing best practices operation: allea-tenk tenk, finnish in legal compliance, data ongoing, engage.eu in association of management, and open line with task 5.4 of the research managers science alliance and administrators finn-arma research ethics group, doctoral education network, coara network in finland (steered by the federation of finnish learned societies), fun (finnish universities network) library director’s group, haris, findocnet (finnish doctoral training network), secretariat for the national open science and research coordination/avoin tiede 20. exchange of good practices internationally with the university alliance engage.eu (task 5.4), allea, ebslg- european business school librarians’ group, european open science cloud (eosc) 12 communicate 21. availability of 21. research track: spring rector, hr, heads of dcs, materials available on in the planning phase progress made materials developed 2024, teaching track: fall hods, hos, research the web and included on adherence to in point 16 to faculty, 2024 services in manager/supervisor the principles and post docs and training implementation of doctoral researchers 22. 2024-2025 the commitments to enhance the materials included in 23. continuous introduction to new awareness of requirements for faculty, post docs and recruitment and doctoral researchers promotion sufficient materials 22. enhanced support and communication to and guidance to applicants throughout the doctoral researchers recruitment processes and postdocs 23. clear recruitment principles: timely and appropriate communication with candidates, guidelines for site visits, and interviews with candidates implementation and follow-up the practices, criteria, tools, and actions described above will be reviewed and revised along any updates of hanken’s strategy and action plans, and with the imple- mentation of new personnel instructions. to make sure the identified actions are implemented sufficiently and effectively, involvement is required from decision-making bodies and work groups which, in turn, engages many staff members in the processes. by monitoring indicators regularly, the progress can be tracked, and possible need for reassessment of actions can be done in a timely manner.
