coara action plan – university of urbino coara action plan university of urbino uniurb roadmap to the reform of research assessment 1 coara action plan – university of urbino 1. introduction ............................................................................................................................. 3 2. context and state of art ........................................................................................................... 4 3. action plan with defined milestones ....................................................................................... 7 4. implementation ..................................................................................................................... 11 this document was approved by: academic senate, resolution n. 152 on june 28, 2024 board of directors, resolution n. 216 on june 28, 2024. 2 coara action plan – university of urbino 1. introduction in november 2022, the university of urbino carlo bo (uniurb) formally signed the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), pledging to implement the core commitments and supporting commitments outlined by the agreement. as a signatory of the agreement arra, uniurb joined the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) composed of other european research institutions, to enable systemic reform based on common principles within an agreed timeframe, and to facilitate exchanges of information and mutual learning between all those willing to improve research assessment practices. in 2023 uniurb joined the coara italian national chapter, led by the cnr and the university of bologna, aiming at assisting the italian coara members in implementing the commitments. in the context of the italian national chapter, uniurb is participating in the activities of the wp1: coordination, engagement, and expansion of the national chapter, and, in particular, task 1.2: institutional roadmap alignment. the task 1.2 is dedicated to aligning the italian coara members in the definition and updating their institutional roadmap. uniurb started to translate the commitments into “internal milestones and actions” by appointing the “reforming research assessment committee” whose main aim is to coordinate and support the reform process based on the approach outlined by “the scope framework: a five-stage process for evaluating research responsibly”. the committee is structured into two subgroups: 1. the research assessment policy committee, which is responsible for coordinating and overseeing the internal reform process; 2. the working group for responsible research assessment, which is responsible for designing the action plan to be approved by the academic bodies. in addition to the contribution in terms of human resources dedicated to the reform of research assessment, uniurb foreseen a budget to implement some actions outlined in the action plan in accordance with the supporting commitment no. 5 “ as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to”. 3 coara action plan – university of urbino 2. context and state of art the university of urbino carlo bo (uniurb) recognises its status as a multidisciplinary university, where stem sciences, social sciences, and humanities coexist, as a core value: it recognises the importance of the variety of its scientific disciplines, of the different research types (e.g. basic research vs applied research) and of the diversity of the research approaches (ex. interdisciplinary approach) available in its academic community [see psa 2024-26 page 7]. this vision aligns with the principles and commitments outlined by the agreement on reforming research assessment (arra), signed by uniurb in 2022, as well as with the general principles and requirements of the european charter for researchers and the code of conduct for the recruitment of researchers, which uniurb is committed to implement after being granted with the “hr excellence in research award” in 2024. uniurb promotes a research culture based on quality, integrity, transparency, knowledge- sharing, societal and economic impact, ethics, and inclusiveness, considering them as key elements of its mission and vision. indeed, uniurb embedded these principles into its strategic plan: o to maximise the quality of research, to develop and design new responsible research assessment criteria and processes, primarily based on qualitative evaluation; o to align its hr practices with those of the european charter and a code (i.e., human research strategy for researchers - hrs4r) in order to attract and retain talented researchers; o to contribute the stimulating and favourable work environment for researchers at all career stages; o to foster uniurb national and international dimension in order to establish new partnerships, to expand and strengthen its networks, and to facilitate researchers’ international mobility; o to promote and reward the ability to attract research funds and projects. 4 coara action plan – university of urbino consistently with its hrs4r (action plan) and the strategic goals, uniurb identifies the following arra core commitments as priorities: 1. recognise the diversity of research contributions to, and careers in, ; 2. since they have an impact on the processes/criteria for assessing both research outputs and researchers (ex. career progressions/recruitment). moreover, to facilitate mutual learning, communicate progress and ensure that new approaches are evidence informed, uniurb endorses all the supporting commitments, also playing an active role in the italian national chapter and the coara coalition. in the process of advancing research assessment reform, uniurb identified the following key challenges to fill the gaps which are currently impeding the full implementation of the arra commitments: o internal key challenges: 1) selective procedures for recruitment/career progressions are mostly based on quantitative indicators; 2 ) lack of clear guidelines to progressively switch from quantitative based to qualitative evaluation of research informed by publication metrics; 3) there is a limited awareness about the importance of switching from a publication metrics approach to a qualitative approach that could favour the development of uniurb according to its strategic vision 4) there is still a limited explicit adoption of open science practices that can boost the quality of the scientific outputs; 5) the internal research assessment system only partially recognises the plurality and the diversity of research contributions (input: gap analysis eu charter&code); 6) limited low number of interdisciplinary research outputs; 5 coara action plan – university of urbino o external key challenges (for which uniurb doesn’t have the power/authority to address due to the national legislation/regulation currently impeding full implementation): o national scientific qualification (i.e., asn) mostly adopt author-based metrics (e.g., counting papers, patents, citations, grants, etc.) to evaluate quality and/or impact; o alignment of national law and national research assessment system with arra, also through the engagement of mur and anvur in coara. o at present national scientific qualification (i.e., asn) does not recognise the interruptions/diverse paths in the research career as potentially valuable. 6 coara action plan – university of urbino 3. action plan with defined milestones in its effort to fulfil the commitments outlined by the agreement, uniurb has developed the following action plan to be implemented within the timeline established in the arra. consistency with the other arra core timeline consistency with strategic selected arra commitments and the (2024-2027) plan 2024-2026 actions core milestones supporting status (thematic heading and commitments commitments (*) (in progress, to be strategic goal id) (if applicable) planned) dedicate specific support to favour the application supporting commitment research for funding opportunities dedicated to early-stage 2024 (in progress) no. 8 r.4 - r.5 career researchers reward researchers who apply to international competitive calls for proposals even though not supporting commitment research 2025 (to be planned) value diverse research funded, but evaluated as excellent (e.g., seal of no. 5 r.5 1. recognise the activities, outputs, and excellence) diversity of impacts, since the very dedicate specific budget to promote the cooperation third mission/societal contributions to, supporting commitment beginning of the career between young researchers and actors beyond 2025 (to be planned) impact and careers in, no. 8 academia tm.3 research in third mission/societal accordance with reward researchers’ impacts, establishing the award supporting commitment 2026 (to be planned) impact the needs and for “impact in research @uniurb” no. 5 tm.1 - tm.4 nature of the uniurb post-doc award for young researchers that supporting commitment research research 2027 (to be planned) produced high quality publications no. 5 r.1 strengthen synergy between administrative and engage academic community academic staff in relation to new legislation, community, inclusiveness, in recognising the diversity supporting commitment university policies and strategies on research 2024 (in progress) organisation, sustainability of contributions no. 7 (continuous update) by organising regular cios.4 information seminars held by administrative staff in 7 coara action plan – university of urbino favour of ph.d students, post-docs, researchers and professors to increase an awareness about the different research approaches and methods, as well as the main outcomes expected by national and international authorities disseminate among researchers the best practices in supporting research research diversity recognition, by joining the coara commitments no. 7 and 2024 (in progress) r.1 events/meetings and by erasmus+ staff mobilities 8 provide researchers with training on open science to encourage them to think broadly about the diversity supporting commitment research 2024 (in progress) and plurality of outputs that arise from their no. 7 r.1 research host conferences and seminars on open science supporting commitment research 2024 (in progress) principles and practices no. 7 and 8 r.1 reforming the organisation of laboratories and value interdisciplinary in research facilities to favour the sharing of expertise, supporting commitment research research activities 2024 (in progress) knowledge and different research approaches to no. 8 r.1 boost interdisciplinary in research activities supporting explore the possibility to better align open call 2. base research commitments no. 6 and 2025 (to be planned) research positions to arra principles assessment 7 primarily on promote quality recruitment by providing judging qualitative commissions with guidelines that define qualitative evaluation for focus on quality in research criteria to favour recruitments in line with the supporting which peer review assessment, recruitment and uniurb’s strategic development research commitments no. 6 and 2025 (to be planned) is central, career progressions r.4 7 supported by provide guidance and support to panels and responsible use of committee, defining “guidelines for responsible quantitative research assessment” indicators supporting align application forms to qualitative principles research commitments no. 6 and 2025 (to be planned) embraced by the uniurb r.4 7 8 coara action plan – university of urbino provide guidelines and templates for narrative cvs, supporting commitment research 2025 (to be planned) in line with arra principles and the hrs4r1 no. 6 r.1 - r.3 - r.4 pilot an internal system to monitor the quality of research 2026 (to be planned) recruitments r.4 favour career advancement for researchers capable supporting research of attracting prestigious grants from competitive and 2024 (in progress) commitments no. 6 r.4 - r.5 international calls for proposals provide additional funds for researchers conducting high-quality research, to be used for team building, supporting commitment research funding of research activities, payment of publication 2025 (to be planned) no. 5 r.4 – r.5 fees, etc., to ensure long-term research and to retain talented scholars increase researchers' awareness about the importance of describing each authors' responsibility supporting research and contribution in their final research outputs 2024 (in progress) commitments no. 7 r.1 (ex. credit and/or using the institutional repository - iris - contributor roles taxonomy) implement the institutional research repository (iris-ora) public landing page to highlight the supporting commitment research 2025 (to be planned) “excellent” publications according to the institutional no. 6 r.1 “excellence set of criteria” consider the principles of the san francisco core commitment no. 3 research declaration on research assessment (dora) in and supporting 2025 (to be planned) r.1 research assessment procedures commitment no. 6 progressive transition to pilot new peer review models in cooperation with core commitment no. 3 research research assessment based other universities, already partnering in networks and supporting 2024 (in progress) r.1 primarily on peer review (i.e., hamu), starting from selected disciplines commitment no. 6 pilot diverse indicators (ex. credit, orcid, etc) and core commitment no. 3 research metrics (ex. plumx, etc) that can possibly capture and supporting 2024 (to be planned) r.1 quality and impact to support research evaluation commitment no. 6 1 narrative cvs will gain researchers the opportunity to describe their key achievements in research, and why they are important; moreover, researchers can provide evidence of their specific contribution to each research output, describe their competencies, their mobility experiences (international, inter-sectoral, etc) and their career path(s) 9 coara action plan – university of urbino (*) supporting commitments: 4. 5. as is needed to achieve the organisational changes committed to 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. , 10 coara action plan – university of urbino 4. implementation the components of research committee responsible for research quality assurance at departmental level (i.e. raq-rd) will oversee/manage the implementation of the actions, and report at least once every two months to the research committee and the relevant academic bodies that are in charge of the monitoring of this road map. 11 allegati 1
