https://irie.uib.cat/ coalition for advancing research assessment coara action plan 2024-2027 https://irie.uib.cat/ coara action plan – irie 2024-2027 background irie is a university institute for educational research and innovation in the fields of education and training. it was created in 2015, through executive agreement 11458, of 28 july, in the context of the transformation of the uib's institute of education sciences (ice) into a research institute. the institute for educational research and innovation (irie) is since april 19th 2024 member of the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara). part of the commitment to coara is the development of a four-year institutional action plan to fulfill the agreement on reforming research assessment. this document describes the action plan that the irie undertakes to carry out between 2024 and 2027, which was approved by the executive board on may 22, following a process of internal consultation and participation. for this, the recommendations provided in support for coara signatories in the preparation of action plans were taken into account when preparing this action plan. research assessment at the irie irie is governed by regulatory agreement 13022, dated march 08, 2019, which approves and makes public its regulations, which, in article 6, establish as purposes: 1. irie will be dedicated to quality scientific research in the field of education and training, will provide development services (knowledge transfer) and will also carry out postgraduate teaching activities, postgraduate courses and specific training courses. one of the main objectives is to promote mechanisms to improve educational quality and excellence. 2. to fulfill the intended purposes, irie will carry out the following activities: a) to promote, organize and coordinate, education research in the institute's fields, especially related to the needs and problems of the education and training system, to improve its knowledge and improve the quality of practice in schools and other entities and institutions that carry out educational and training functions. b) plan, organize, and develop doctoral and postgraduate programs and studies in any of the areas that affect the education and training of teachers. 29 de abril de 2024 2 https://irie.uib.cat/ c) to promote the scientific, technical, social and cultural development of all those sectors and elements that form part of the field of education. d) to provide technical advice to the government of the balearic islands (goib), the ministry with specific competences in education and professionals from all sectors related to education and training in organizational, methodological and curricular innovation, and in all matters related to the lines of research of the irie groups. e) collaborate with the statements of the uib and with the faculties and schools, departments and other institutes of the university, as well as with the public or private entities with which the provision of services in matters of education and training of teachers is arranged. f) acknowledging and promoting the research conducted by the research groups of the institute within the scientific community and the education system, and in all sectors linked to education and training (both formal and informal). g) provide resources and support to the research groups of irie to develop research in the field of education. h) establish contracts as provided for in article 83 of the lou, subject to the university's provisions regarding the transfer of research results and the destination of the goods and resources obtained. i) relate and coordinate research activity with that of similar entities, state and foreign, and participate in research projects and joint activity programs. j) to promote the attraction of public and private resources, to obtain complementary financial funds to the possible contributions of the institutions that participate in the operation and the tasks of the institute. k) any other activity whose fundamental purpose is to comply with the founding purposes of the irie, its regulations and the uib statutes. the irie is focused on four research areas with a total of 13 research groups: 1. school didactics and organization, an area comprising three consolidated research groups: education and citizenship; educational technology group; and inclusive school and diversity research group. 2. specific didactics comprising six consolidated research groups: 4mac- tourist education and research; science, technology and society. didactics of science; research into culture, society, communication and contemporary thought; languages, literature and learning research group; sociolinguistic research group of the balearic islands; and physical activity and sport sciences research group. 29 de abril de 2024 3 https://irie.uib.cat/ 3. social, development and educational psychology, comprising two consolidated research groups: research into development, education and language; and gender studies. 4. theory and history of education, an area comprising two consolidated research groups: the social and educational training and research group; and the history of education research group. in addition to the consolidated research groups spread over these four areas, the irie has also a series of associate research groups (new groups being consolidated and reporting to consolidated groups) and individual researchers. the irie offers a research advice service (sar) to all these groups. in turn, the irie places particular emphasis on knowledge-transfer and direct work with educational institutions, and associations or bodies linked to the field of education in the balearic islands. it offers both centers and teachers a series of training activities aimed at continuous innovation within the framework of the education system. 29 de abril de 2024 4 https://irie.uib.cat/ action plan 2024-2027 the initial proposition for enhancing research evaluation within the irie, outlined in the action plan 2024-2027, seeks to advance and bolster high-quality and impactful research, aligning with the pledges made in coara. coara commitments timeline action lines actions assessment method 1. recognize the diversity of 2024-2027 already a principle applied by being a commitment that cuts across by tracking research contributions to, and the irie the agreements outlined by coara, it progress, stimulate the careers in, research in does not have a specific line of action; participation of diverse accordance with the needs rather, it will be an axis applicable to all researchers to enrich the and nature of the research developed points, emphasizing the outcomes. value of research from diversity and multidisciplinary point of view. 2. base research assessment 2024-2027 already a principle applied by currently, it is already a principle appropriate use of primarily on qualitative the irie applied by the irie in the promotion and quantitative and qualitative evaluation for which peer support of researchers. methodologies. review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators 3. abandon inappropriate 2024-2027 scientific rigor refers to the base all scientific principles of research follow the principles of the uses in research strict adherence to on rigor and penalize inappropriate scientific method in assessment of journal – methodological principles. uses in research evaluation. evaluation. and publication – based metrics, https://irie.uib.cat/ 4. avoid the use of rankings of 2024-2027 already a principle applied by base the evaluation on a research organizations in the irie scientific classification research assessment according to the criterion of the evaluator with a proven track record. 5. commit resources to 2024-2027 preparation, execution, and - action plan implementation elaboration of an annual reforming research oversight of the irie's coara - annual monitoring monitoring report based on assessment as is needed to action plan. - yearly funding allocated for coara principles. achieve the organizational executing the initiatives outlined in changes committed to the coara action plan 2024-2027. 6. review and develop 2024-2027 review and develop the calls - internal calls for research projects annual review of the research assessment, projects in accordance with (education innovative projects) published call and an tools, and processes the coara principles. - research accelerator for internal overall analysis of its calls results from coara - internal calls for predoctoral and perspective. postdoctoral candidates 7. raise awareness of 2024-2027 internal communication - disseminate the coara principles meetings, seminars and research assessment strategy with research groups and discuss their internal webinars to promote reform and provide to disseminate the coara application at the irie research academic debate. transparent commitments and the action groups internal & external communication, guidance, plan 2024-2027. - implementation of internal communication actions. and training on assessment communication actions based on criteria and processes as specific strategies for well as their use communicating the coara commitments. 8. exchange practices and 2024-2027 engagement and dialogue - participation in coara’s general annual summary of the experiences to enable channels with coara for assembly participation and activities. mutual learning within and e\ective communication and - participation in coara’s spanish beyond the coalition continuous feedback. chapter 29 de abril de 2024 6 https://irie.uib.cat/ - participation in other coara working groups 9. communicate progress 2024-2027 engagement and dialogue - participation in coara’s general annual summary of the made on adherence to the channels with coara for assembly participation and activities. principles and e\ective communication and - participation in coara’s spanish implementation of the continuous feedback. chapter commitments - participation in other coara working groups 10. evaluate practices, criteria 2024-2027 tracking and assessment of publication of results. annual review by the and tools based on solid successful case studies or executive board. evidence and the state-of- novel evaluation the-art in research on suggestions. research, 29 de abril de 2024 7
