action plan 2024–2027 centria university of applied sciences 1. organisation vice rector (rdi) marko forsell 2. responsible person marko.forsell@centria.fi rdi manager johanna jansson 3. contact person johanna.jansson@centria.fi quality manager leena saari 4. other persons contributing to the action plan hr manager jouko mäki-korvela 1. background centria university of applied sciences (hereon centria) signed the agreement on reforming research assessment and joined the coalition for advancing research assessment on june 9th, 2023. we aim to ensure that the evaluation of research and researchers acknowledges diverse forms of research outputs, methodologies, and engagement, taking into account various career paths and individual circumstances while assessing the quality and impact of research. full agreement can be accessed at: coara agreement. 1.1. research in universities of applied sciences in finland the need for coara agreement arises from challenges inherent in the academic research tradition, which differs from the research, development, and innovation (rdi) activities in universities of applied sciences (uas). due to the characteristics of uas-driven rdi work, such as development-orientation, translationality and interdisciplinarity, the identified challenges underlying coara play a minor role in uass. rdi activities are fundamentally applied research, where the important values are both the advancement of scientific knowledge and the acceptability and practical applicability of the results. uass in finland hold a vital, statutory role in regional development, serving as integral partners in regional innovation ecosystems. consequently, the emphasis on diversity of contributions, collaboration and societal impact in research, as outlined in the coara agreement, is ingrained in the fundamental identity of uass. the coara process offers an opportunity to underline the societal value of applied research, while also making visible and enhancing the practices associated with assessing research, researchers, and research organizations. 1.2. centria university of applied sciences as one of the most international universities in finland, centria integrates collaborations with international rdi partners, international degree and exchange students, and english-conducted degree programs and courses into its everyday operation. with a robust understanding of project work, the centria manages over 100 ongoing development projects annually, engaging experienced researchers, teachers, and students. the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) wg call email: info@coara.eu  website: www.coara.eu the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) centria's rdi aims to boost the competitiveness of entities in the region and improve well-being of the community. centria, despite constituting only around two percent of finland's uas students, plays a substantial role as a regional developer. the corresponding rdi turnover, at around five percent, underscores its impact beyond its size. rdi activities take place across all three campuses in kokkola, pietarsaari, and ylivieska, thereby contributing to regional development in central ostrobothnia, ostrobothnia, and northern ostrobothnia. centria's rdi organisation is structured into seven teams, each specializing in specific areas: chemistry and bioeconomy, digitalisation, production technology, entrepreneurship and business, well-being and health, pre-awards and networks, and services. these teams house interdisciplinary research groups, composed of centria's experts collaborating on specific research topics. projects are designed and executed collaboratively across the boundaries of the research groups, often in conjunction with teaching activities. the research groups serve as a means to effectively showcase centria's key rdi expertise to partners, aiming to share the latest knowledge and technologies with regional, national and international stakeholders. centria is dedicated to making the results of its rdi activities readily accessible to the region's stakeholders. in instances where feasible, project outcomes are transformed into services or commercialized for external stakeholder use. the services team takes charge of organizing development and training services. as centria's rdi activities continue to grow, there is a need to review and further develop rdi evaluation processes. the coara framework offers a well-suited structure for this purpose. 2. objectives in accordance with coara, centria aims to evaluate and update the assessment practices on three levels: 1) research we must ensure that centria's research assessment practices primarily rely on qualitative methodologies that are supported with responsible use of quantitative indicators. a key focus should be on motivating employees to engage in rdi activities that yield significant societal impact, adhere to the highest standards of quality, and enhance collaboration and openness. currently, the evaluation of research within uass diverges from academic research tradition, avoiding dependence on journal- and publication-based metrics, or similar numerical benchmarks. nonetheless, it remains crucial to proactively safeguard against the potential adoption of inappropriate quantitative assessment practices in the future either. 2) researchers and other persons working on research the term 'researcher' encompasses all individuals participating in rdi activities across various roles. centria is committed to ensuring transparent and fair evaluation of individual researchers and other research-related personnel, and already recognises the diversity of contributions to research, such as societal impact, business and academic networks, research orientation, project expertise and teaching. we are currently updating the career path model to accommodate a broader range of rdi career opportunities. as part of this reform, we will review the evaluation process and, where necessary, consider novel strategies and tools for researcher assessment. the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) 3) research organizations finland is internationally recognized as a forerunner in advancing responsible research and researcher assessment, with longstanding national collaboration coordinated by federation of finnish learned societies (tieteellisten seurain valtuuskunta, tsv). the coara agreement aligns with finland's previously published national recommendations, introducing a schedule for implementing reforms. furthermore, centria undergoes various regular evaluations from authorities and rdi funding bodies, with our funding being directly influenced by the results of these assessments. we welcome the opportunity provided by coara to underscore the significance of applied research and elevate the profile of uass at the eu level as competent project partners and coordinators of applied research projects. 3. overview of actions action deadline 1 completing and publishing the staff policy 30.6.2024 2 publishing the research groups’ actions plans on centria’s websites 31.12.2024 3 establishing a peer review process among strategic higher education partners 31.12.2027 4 developing a framework for competence management to raise scientific standards and a 31.12.2027 process for the internal visibility of competences within centria 5 bringing qualitative indicators to management reporting when raising the scientific standards 31.12.2027 of centria. 6 ensuring the appropriate use of quantitative indicators in the development of doctoral 31.12.2027 education capability of centria. in the doctoral education in uas, interdisciplinarity, societal impact and networks are emphasized. 7 emphasising qualitative indicators alongside the responsible use of quantitative indicators in 30.6.2024 the partnership policy 8 securing sufficient resources to plan and implement the organisational changes defined in the 31.12.2027 coara commitments. 9 exchanging practices and experiences to enable mutual learning and to promote coara 31.12.2027 objectives within and beyond the coara coalition 10 developing a framework to assessing societal impact across centria’s all activities 31.12.2027 11 communicating the progress of the coara commitment process and raising awareness of 31.12.2027 its significance through various channels 12 monitoring the number of open data sets distributed by centria in the open access repositories 31.12.2027 13 providing external researchers with access to centria’s research(er) evaluation data for 31.12.2027 research purposes when requested and where possible annex: gap analysis commitment in the agreement on state of play at centria uas in march 2024 objectives and actions 2024–2027 reforming research assessment 1 recognise the diversity of candidates are evaluated based on their competencies rather than solely on the staff policy is scheduled for completion contributions to, and careers in, their scientific merits. alongside subject-matter expertise, factors such as in spring 2024 (action 1). upon its research in accordance with the needs professional networks, regional knowledge, experience in rdi projects, publication, centria is fulfilling this and nature of the research prior teaching engagements, and pedagogical qualifications are integral commitment. considerations in the selection process. the recruitment principles are outlined in centria's hr policy, which will be finalized in spring 2024. research work at centria entails diverse roles with varying demands and content. the level of demand influences the salary grade of individuals. competency requirements corresponding to different roles are detailed in centria's career path framework for all staff, encompassing roles in rdi, teaching, and support services. this model is distributed to staff members via the intranet platform. 2 base research assessment primarily rdi project evaluation the research groups' action plans will be on qualitative evaluation for which centria sets qualitative and quantitative targets and metrics for rdi published on the research groups’ websites peer review is central, supported by projects, evaluating their achievement upon completion. objectives and by the end of 2024. (action 2) responsible use of quantitative outcomes are documented in project setting and closure forms. indicators peer review among strategic higher qualitative goals include impact and sustainability evaluation, integration education partners will be implemented by of rdi and teaching, and project result exploitation. quantitative metrics the end of 2027. (action 3) encompass factors like participant numbers (companies, individuals), budget, thesis production, and student involvement. thus, the responsible centria's new strategy for 2025–2028 use of quantitative indicators in the evaluation of research is already taking includes the objective of raising scientific place. in addition, centria has an open science policy for rdi actions. each standards. the framework for competence project has a steering group to assess progress and provide feedback. management is being developed as part of the strategy implementation. (action 4) research group evaluation the research groups have drawn up a long-term action plan, the progress of qualitative indicators will be brought into which they assess in an annual self-evaluation report. reporting alongside financial indicators. (action 5) the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) wg call email: info@coara.eu  website: www.coara.eu the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) 3 abandon inappropriate uses in quantitative journal metrics are not used inappropriately in research(er) centria is already meeting this commitment. research assessment of journal- and assessment. additionally, when developing doctoral publication-based metrics, in education capability, we will ensure that particular inappropriate uses of quantitative indicators are not misapplied journal impact factor (jif) and h- either in the future. (action 6) index 4 avoid the use of rankings of research rankings are not used in research organisation assessment. centria is already meeting this commitment. organisations in research assessment furthermore, centria is preparing a partnership policy to be finalised in spring 2024, which will include criteria for the selection of partner universities, with an emphasis on qualitative indicators alongside the responsible use of quantitative indicators. (action 7) 5 commit resources to reforming centria has allocated resources for planning and implementing the coara the development measures of coara will research assessment as is needed to action plan. expertise needed is available inside centria’s units, in be incorporated into centria's annual achieve the organisational changes particular the rdi department, the hr department, and administration strategy-based action plan, ensuring they committed to department. are not handled as separate initiatives. (action 8) 6 review and develop research 6.1. criteria for units and institutions 6.1 criteria for units and assessment criteria, tools and centria representatives are actively involved in various national groups and institutions processes networks whose activities support the objectives of coara. these groups centria continues to participate in current include: groups and networks, thereby promoting the 6.1. criteria for units and objectives of coara. (action 9) institutions - the rectors’ conference of finnish universities of applied with the direct involvement of sciences (arene) research organisations and researchers at all career stages, review - the finnish association of research managers and administrators and develop criteria for assessing (finn-arma) research units and research performing organisations, while - the network of open rdi and learning (rdil) in finnish promoting interoperability universities of applied sciences - the dmp consortium (collaborative network to promote research data management planning in finland) the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) - the network of research integrity advisers operating under the finnish national board of research integrity (tenk) in addition, centria contributes to the development requests of the finnish education evaluation centre (fineec) 6.2 criteria for projects 6.2 criteria for projects and researchers 6.2. criteria for projects and and researchers processes for evaluating research and researchers within centria have been researchers with the direct involvement of identified, but they are currently separate. centria's new strategy for 2025–2028 researchers at all career stages, review includes a development agenda focused on and develop criteria, tools and impact and foresight. the goal is to processes for the assessment of mainstream impact thinking across all research projects, research teams and activities and develop a framework for researchers that are adapted to their assessing societal impact. (action 10) context of application additionally, an integrated framework will be developed to evaluate individual researchers, research teams, and rdi activities comprehensively. furthermore, as part of the competency management framework, a process is being established to promote the internal visibility of competences within centria. (action 4) 7 raise awareness of research existing communication channels are already in place for broad centria aims with internal dissemination to assessment reform and provide communication ensure that all employees understand the transparent communication, coara process, including its background guidance, and training on assessment and objectives. we share information about criteria and processes as well as their the coara process and its progress use through various channels, such as the centria website, the intranet, rdi events, and centria bulletin. the content covers project evaluation, researcher evaluation, and the unique characteristics of uas as implementers within the coara framework. (action 11) the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) 8 exchange practices and experiences centria has joined the finnish national chapter (nc) of coara, which is as a member of the finnish national to enable mutual learning within and dedicated to helping its members implement coara commitments. the chapter of coara and finnish uas beyond the coalition chapter also aims to engage a broader spectrum of stakeholders in coara network, centria will contribute to activities at a national level. knowledge sharing, mutual learning, and discussions from the perspective of uas. furthermore, centria is a member of the finnish uas network, which is an (action 9) independent network operating separately from coara. our involvement in this network allows us to participate in discussions and collaborations centria also disseminates information related to implementing coara principles. the finnish uas network acts regarding its centria coara action plan to as a continuous collaborative platform for research assessment international project consortia in which it development, even beyond the active working period of the coara participates as a partner. (action 9) national chapter. 9 communicate progress made on centria will share information about the adherence to the principles and coara process and its progress through implementation of the commitments various channels, such as the centria website, the intranet, rdi events, and the centria bulletin. (action 11) 10 evaluate practices, criteria and tools the results of rdi activities are fundamentally open and public the number of open data sets will be based on solid evidence and the state- information, and centria also adheres to the principles of open science. monitored (how much and which data sets of- the-art in research on research, and additionally, centria provides data to national authorities on its research centria shares within the open access make data openly available for activities. repositories). (action 12) evidence gathering and research where feasible, centria will make its data available to researchers conducting research on research upon request. (action 13)
