dgps: coara action plan the dgps already signed the san francisco declaration on research assessment (dora) in 2021 and was the first german scientific society to join the coalition for advancing research assessment (coara) at the beginning of 2023. coara aims to ensure that various practices and activities that promote the intrinsic quality of research are recognized in the assessment of research. not only publications should count, but also, for example, large published data sets or the development of research software; transparency and reproducibility are explicitly named as relevant quality criteria. a qualitative evaluation process should be supported by the responsible use of valid quantitative indicators. this action plan describes how the dgps pursues the process of implementing the core commitments according to an action plan with defined milestones. the action plan has been approved on 2024-06-29 by the executive committee of the dgps. process: • for our action plan, we systematized possible types of research assessment and evaluated which are performed within our academic society (see p. 2). • for all relevant types, we systematically assessed the current state of the coara core commitments (1 to 4) and derive milestones and concrete action points (with a date and a responsible person; see pp. 3-11) • cross-cutting through all types, we evaluate the supporting commitments 5 to 10 (see pp. 12-13) • contributors: prof. dr. felix schönbrodt (lmu münchen, head of the open science commission), prof. dr. anna-lena schubert (jgu mainz, executive secretary of the dgps commission), prof. dr. mario gollwitzer (lmu münchen; member of the open science dgps coara action plan 2 commission and the commission ‘studium und lehre’) and prof. dr. jakob fink-lamotte (u postdam; member of the open science commission) 1. types of research assessment done within dgps type of research assessment done at dgps? id comment dgps membership regulations ✓ r awards ✓ a academic graduation (e.g., phd, habilitation) (✓) g not done within our society, but we provide recommendations on that topic for our members recommendations academic hiring (✓) h not done within our society, but we work on recommendations on that topic for our members recommendations job promotion to a higher payment or prestige level ✘ performance-oriented payments and rewards ✘ funding decisions (both third-party and internal funding; ✘ project-based and/or permanent positions) we will review the current state and propose actions for the four relevant areas (dgps membership regulations, graduation, hiring, and awards) separately. dgps coara action plan 3 2. the current state of coara commitments in our research assessment + future milestones 2.1. dgps membership regulations (id: r) coara core current state milestone action points responsible / commitment date 1. recognise the diversity of one publication (beyond r1: consider other ● r1a: change the text on the website to dgps executive contributions to, and careers in, and independent from the contributions (e.g., data or recognize diversity of contributions as a committee research in accordance with the dissertation) is necessary to software publications) as a criterion for full membership, by adding further needs and nature of the research be eligible as a dgps criterion for full membership. contributions that can also be recognized (e.g., member. this requires an amendment data or software publications). in §5 (4) of our statutes. as date: 30-09-2026 we do no quality check ● r1b: define the procedure of how the quality of ourself, those other these contributions can be checked for, by e.g., contributions should also be defining qualitative criteria for a peer reviewing peer-reviewed. process. date: 30-09-2026 ● r1c: change the statutes §5 (4) date: 30-09-2026 2. base research assessment the quality of the additional as the hurdles for becoming a - - primarily on qualitative publication and/or the member are minimal criteria, evaluation for which peer dissertation is not we consider the existence of review is central, supported by considered. one additional contribution responsible use of quantitative sufficient (without further indicators check of quality; we trust the mandatory peer-review here) 3. abandon inappropriate uses not done; no change - - - in research assessment of needed. journal- and publication-based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses 4. avoid the use of rankings of not done; no change - - - dgps coara action plan 4 research organisations in needed. research assessment dgps coara action plan 5 2.2. awards (id: a) the dgps currently awards eight central prices and at least 48 additional awards are given from the different sections. next central awards will be awarded in 2026: call will be announced at the end of 2025, submissions will be possible until jan 2026. the calls for the next section awards will be, presumably, at the end of 2024. we plan to achieve the milestones a1 to a6 until then. coara core current state milestone action points responsible commitment 1. recognise the diversity of there are many a1: explicitly mention ● a1a: mention “diversity of contributions” in all central dgps contributions to, and careers different awards that “diversity of contributions” public award announcements and all internal executive in, research in accordance with are awarded either by in all awards. guidelines for award committees. where possible make it committee / the needs and nature of the the head organization concrete (e.g., by mentioning “data sets” and “research section boards research or by the different a2: create a “how-to” software”). / coara sections. criteria are document for award date: 15-12-2024 commission defined in the committees that is handed ● a1b: analogously, change criteria and documents of all respective call for each out to all members of the awards of the fachgruppen. award and can be committees upon date: 15-12-2024 changed each time an appointment. this applies to ● a2a: create a "how-to" document that defines the generic award is announced. all central awards and all rules for the work of the award committees in the across all sections, the awards of the fachgruppen. discipline. this should define how the committee takes most frequently listed it contains generic rules that into account the "diversity of contributions" in the award criteria are (1) apply to all committees. process. where possible make it concrete (e.g., by innovation, (2) explicitly mention “diversity mentioning "data sets" and "research software"). in scientific quality, (3) of contributions”. addition, further coara core commitments should be methodological quality, considered in the "how-to" document (see a2-a.4) (4) originality, and (5) date: 15-12-2024 open science practices. ● a2b: save the "how-to" document in a suitable location where all members of current and future committees can access it. date: 15-12-2024 ● a2c: the “how-to” documents are centrally reviewed. date: 30-09-2025 2. base research assessment in an internal survey of a3: explicitly mention ● a3a: mention “quality over quantity” in all central public dgps dgps coara action plan 6 primarily on qualitative criteria used across “quality over quantity” in award announcements and all internal guidelines for executive evaluation for which peer sections, we found that the award announcements. award committees. where possible make it concrete (e.g., committee / review is central, supported by the vast majority of by defining qualitative criteria and by defining a peer section boards responsible use of quantitative research assessment is a4: explicitly mention review procedure). / coara indicators already based on “quality over quantity” in date: 15-12-2024 commission qualitative evaluation. the “how-to” document (see ● a3b: analogously, change criteria and documents of all however, currently no a2). the laudatio should awards of the fachgruppen. specific refrain from capitalizing on date: 15-12-2024 recommendations to quantity. ● a4a: explicitly mention “quality over quantity” in the prefer qualitative over “how-to” document for award committees (see a2a). quantitative where possible make it concrete (e.g., by defining assessments is given. qualitative criteria and by defining a peer review procedure). date: 15-12-2024 ● a4b: explicitly mention in the “how-to” document for award committees (see a2a) that the award laudation should refrain from capitalizing on quality criteria, but should highlight the qualitative aspects of the research. date: 15-12-2024 3. abandon inappropriate uses journal- and a5: in the “how-to” ● a5a: define in the “how-to” document for award dgps in research assessment of publication-based document (see a2), define committees (see a2a) what an “inappropriate” use of executive journal- and publication-based metrics are not what an “inappropriate” use journal- and publication-based metrics is. where possible committee / metrics, in particular mentioned in calls for of journal- and publication- make it concrete (no use of # of publications, impact section boards inappropriate uses awards, but there is based metrics is. explicitly factors, h-factors, etc.). / coara also no explicit discourage such an use in date: 15-12-2024 commission discouragement. in an award committees. ● a5b: explicitly mention in the “how-to” document for internal survey of award committees (see a2a) that the “inappropriate” use criteria used across of journal- and publication-based metrics is discouraged sections, we found that and will not determine the decision finding of the award jif is sometimes (but committee. not regularly) date: 15-12-2024 considered in award decisions. 4. avoid the use of rankings of no mention of a6: explicitly mention in ● a6a: explicitly mention in the “how-to” document for dgps research organisations in “prestige of the “how-to” document that award committees (see a2a) that the affiliation of a executive dgps coara action plan 7 research assessment university”, but also no the affiliation of a candidate candidate must not play a role in the decision of the award committee / explicit must not play a role in the committee. section boards discouragement. in an decision of the award date: 15-12-2024 / coara internal survey of committee. commission criteria used across sections, we found no evidence that the ranking of research organizations is currently considered as a criterion in research assessment. dgps coara action plan 8 2.3. graduation (id: g) the dgps does not graduate academic personnel itself, but it provides recommendations in these texts: ● bössel, n., kluge, a., leising, d., mischkowski, d., phan, l.v., schmitt, m., & stahl, j. (2023). anreizsystem, machtmissbrauch und wissenschaftliches fehlverhalten. eine analyse zum funktionalen zusammenhang zwischen strukturellen bedingungen und unethischem verhalten in der wissenschaft. https://www.dgps.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/berichte/bericht_amwf20230626.pdf ● empfehlungen der kommission zu unterschiedlichen dissertationsformen coara core current state milestone action points responsible commitment 1. recognise the diversity of only publications / g1: the commission “studium und ● g1a: revise the “empfehlungen der commission contributions to, and careers manuscripts and no lehre” is commissioned to revise their "kommission studium und lehre" der “studium und in, research in accordance with other types of “empfehlungen der "kommission deutschen gesellschaft für psychologie zu lehre” the needs and nature of the contributions are studium und lehre" der unterschiedlichen dissertationsformen” research considered as part of a deutschen gesellschaft für psychologie concerning the diversity of contributions in the dissertation. zu unterschiedlichen dissertation by (a) defining how a diversity of dissertationsformen”. in this revision it contributions (notably, data sets and research 2. base research assessment it is explicitly stated should be explicitly discussed how a software) can be part of the dissertation and primarily on qualitative that dissertations diversity of contributions (notably, data (b) which quality criteria needs to be met. evaluation for which peer should only be sets and research software) can be part date: 30-03-2025 review is central, supported by evaluated based on the of a dissertation, and which quality ● g1b: include insights of the bössel et al responsible use of quantitative quality of the presented criteria they need to fulfill. insights (2023) report (where appropriate) to the indicators research, not the from the bössel et al. (2023) report recommendations of the commissions quantity of included should be transferred into the concerning the evaluation of dissertations. manuscripts / studies / recommendations of the commission. date: 30-03-2025 pages. 3. abandon inappropriate uses not done; no change - - in research assessment of needed. journal- and publication-based metrics, in particular inappropriate uses 4. avoid the use of rankings of not done; no change - - dgps coara action plan 9 research organisations in needed. research assessment dgps coara action plan 10 2.4. hiring (id: h) the dgps does not hire academic staff itself, but it provides recommendations. these recommendations are given in: ● amwf report (bössel et al., 2023, see 2.3) ● recommendations in abele-brehm & bühner 2016 (although these are not official recommendations from the dgps board) ● and the upcoming resque / coara report the main milestone is to develop a recommendation (based on resque, or independent from that) on hiring procedures. coara core current state milestone action points responsible commitment 1. recognise the diversity of the diversity of h1: create a ● h1: create a recommendation for the hiring process in dgps contributions to, and careers contributions and recommendation (based on which the diversity of contributions is explicitly executive in, research in accordance with careers is currently not resque, or independent mentioned. this can be based on resque. where committee / the needs and nature of the reflected in our from that) on hiring possible make it specific (e.g., by defining qualitative coara research recommendations. procedures, that covers the criteria and by mentioning “data sets” and “research commission coara core commitments software”) date: 30-03-2025 2. base research assessment it is recommended to ● h2: create a recommendation for the hiring process in dgps primarily on qualitative engage with individual which the “quality over quantity” is explicitly mentioned. executive evaluation for which peer research outputs in a this can be based on resque. where possible make it committee / review is central, supported by qualitative manner to specific (e.g., by defining qualitative criteria and by coara responsible use of quantitative discuss the individual defining a peer review procedure) commission indicators strengths and date: 30-03-2025 weaknesses of contributions. in addition, committees should ensure that they have sufficient relevant expertise in the subject dgps coara action plan 11 matter being discussed (e.g., through the inclusion of multiple external commission members). 3. abandon inappropriate uses it is recommended to ● h3: create a recommendation for the hiring process in d dgps in research assessment of not use such which the inappropriate use of journal- and publication- executive journal- and publication-based inappropriate based metrics is explicitly mentioned. this can be based committee / metrics, in particular quantitative metrics. on resque. where possible make it concrete (no use of coara inappropriate uses # of publications, impact factors, h-factors, etc.). commission date: 30-03-2025 4. avoid the use of rankings of no mention of ● h4: create a recommendation for the hiring process in dgps research organisations in “prestige of which is mentioned that a candidate’s affiliation must not executive research assessment university”, but also no play a role in the decision of the hiring process. this can committee / explicit be based on resque. coara discouragement. date: 30-03-2025 commission dgps coara action plan 12 3. the supporting commitments (id: s) supporting coara current state milestone action points responsible commitment 5. commit resources to the dgps commits considerable s1: make “research assessment” a s1a: decide that a working dgps executive reforming research assessment resources to reforming research top-priority topic for dgps group on “research committee as is needed to achieve the assessment, mostly in terms of assessment” within the dgps organisational changes voluntary work. specifically, it will receive the status as a committed to has several commissions (the permanent group (instead of a open science commission, the group that would have to be commission “incentive systems, implemented by each new abuse of power and scientific incoming ec) misconduct”, and the resque date: 19-09-2024 working group) that contribute to s1b: create a subpage on the this endeavor, and the executive dgps homepage committee made this one of its (www.dgps.de) dedicated to priorities in its present term of research assessment; label it office. as a “schwerpunktthema” on the website date: 31-10-2024 6. review and develop such criteria are reviewed and s2: task the “research assessment” s2a: install a dgps working dgps executive research assessment criteria, developed by the involved working group (see s1a) with group on “research committee tools and processes commissions and discussed with reviewing and developing criteria, assessment” (select members; the different sections of the tools, and processes, and with write letter of appointment) scientific society. working in collaboration with the and assign members with the “open science” working group task to continuously review and develop criteria, tools, and processes date: 31-10-2024 7. raise awareness of research the executive committee and the s3: maintain the “research s3a: assign one member of coara commission assessment reform and provide involved commissions raise assessment” website on the dgps the new dgps working group transparent communication, awareness of research assessment homepage (see s1b) on “research assessment” as dgps coara action plan 13 guidance, and training on through newsletters, statements, s4: inform the ec regularly about responsible for the website assessment criteria and recommendations, and their work date: 31-01-2025 processes as well as their use discussions. a website dedicated s5: draft information and texts for s4a: invite the head of the to the reform of research the regular dgps newsletter working group to ec assessment if maintained by the (“aktuelle mitteilungen”) meetings (at least twice a resque working group: s6: report about the working group year) https://resque- at plenary sessions of the regularly framework.github.io/website/ fakultätentag psychologie (ftps // s5a: ask the head of the new meetings of psychology department working group to prepare and representatives) draft texts for the newsletter regularly s6a: invite the head of the working group to ftps plenary sessions regularly 8. exchange practices and felix schönbrodt leads the s7: foster exchanges between the s7a: mutual invitations to head of the coara experiences to enable mutual coara working group dgps working groups “open group meetings commission learning within and beyond the “responsible metrics and science”, “research assessment”, regularly coalition indicators” and will communicate and other relevant groups s8a: report at meetings of our insights via this wg. s8: foster exchanges with other other organizations scientific organizations (e.g., date: tba societies, allgemeiner fakultätentag) 9. communicate progress felix schönbrodt takes part in s8: report what is being done at s8a: continuous liaison with head of the coara made on adherence to the regular meeting of the german dgps at the german national the german coara chapter commission principles and implementation national coara chapter. coara chapter regularly of the commitments 10. evaluate practices, criteria newly developed metrics and s9: evaluate practices and criteria: s9a: launch a qualitative and coara commission and tools based on solid tools are currently in the process do dgps committees (e.g., award quantitative evaluation (e.g., evidence and the state-of-the- of being evaluated (see juries) and dgps members (in their survey) on proposed research art in research on research, and https://resque- departments) implement the changes assessment practices three make data openly available for framework.github.io/website/eval proposed by the dgps ec? years after those practices evidence gathering and _projects.html). practices are monitor experiences that dgps have been proposed by the research currently not being evaluated. committees and members make with dgps ec these practices date: 31-12-2027 s10: evaluate tools: review new s10a: develop and assess dgps coara action plan 14 tools and users’ experiences with tools (e.g., a metric for these tools and disseminate these assessing theory precision) experiences among dgps members and disseminate these on the dgps website regularly
